--- Page 1 ---
| Ron ZIMBABWE
Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education

ENGLISH LANGUAC 7B,
SYLLABUS

2024-2030

Grade 3-7

Curriculum Development and Technical Services —
Box MP 133
Mt Pleasant



--- Page 2 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education wishes to acknowledge the following for their valued contribution in
the production of this syllabus:

e The National Primary English Language syllabus panel

e The Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (ZIMSEC)

e Representatives from Universities, Colleges and Schools

e United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)

e United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgement... nti i nee ieee errr nnnieeeeeereenniieeeeeeeenenaees
1.0 Preamble ................ cece ree a eer ee errr ene nieeeeeeeecnnnaaeeeeeerteneniaeeeeees
1.1 Ta) (cole Ce: (0) cre
1.2 Rationale 2.0.2... cece te reer eee e etn eneeeeeeeetnnneeeeeereeennaaees
1.3 Summary Of CONN ooo... cece eect ee eeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeseeceeeeescceeeeeeeeeeeeseneeeesenaas
1.4 ASSUMPTIONS ............cccceceeeeeeeeeeeeneecnceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeteeteceeccdeceeseeneessccsenseeeeees
1.5 Cross Cutting themes ...........:.ccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeseceeeeeenneeeesenaeeeeseats
2.0 CI CUCH RUC) ce
3.0 AIMS... nn reer aeeeeeeerncinieeeeeeeeneenaaes
4.0 Syllabus objectives .......00..... cece cece eee ceeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeceeeeeeceeeeeccaeeeeseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeay
5.0 Methodology and time allocation ......0.0........ ccc eee e ee tntieeeee ee teeaaeeeeeeeeenenaaes
5.1 Methodology ............ ccc eect cenit ee reer eter ee oncneeeeeee er tnniaeeeeeeeneeey


--- Page 3 ---
5.2 Time AllOCAtiON «2.2.2.0... cc ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeecneeesessssssassasatanesecesecenensnetenseeaeaeatetess
6.0 Syllabus topics / SKINS «2.2.0... cece ec cceee ee eeeeeeeeceseeeseeeeseeeeseeneseeneeteseesensnsaneaseseneeseatens
7.0 Junior Scope and Sequence ................cccccccccecceesseeeeeeeseceesnsnsssesnsneetsnsnsessnesensesasesesensanees
8.0 Competency Matrix ............0...ccccceccecseeeeceeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeceeeeeeeceeeeeeceeeesenieeeeenneeeeeas
9.0 ASSESSMENT ........... ccc cccececccc ccc cecceceeeeeeeeeteeeeeeecedeceeeeeeeseeaaaaaaaaeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees

9.1 Assessment ObjeCtIVES ........ cece netrrtre eee tenner rete tinnieeeeeseetntiaeeeeeeeeereenenaaes

9.2 Scheme Of ASSESSMENL .......... eee eeeeeeeececeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeceseneeeeeeesseseetseeeeeeecessseeeeaes

1.0 PREAMBLE

1.1 Introduction

The Junior English Language Syllabus as a build up from the Infant English Language Syllabus, is anchored on a
Heritage-Based Curriculum, emphasising inclusivity and recognising the vital role of English as one of the media for
communication and a driver for cultural, political, religious, social and economic transformation. Integrating the
Competency-based Education principles, the syllabus does not only promote the mastery of the four macro language
skills (listening/observing, speaking/signing, reading and writing/brailing) but also enhances learners’ appreciation of our
tangible and intangible heritage. In this endeavour, the syllabus cultivates knowledge, skills, values, attitudes and
dispositions that contribute to national development. The syllabus adopts a multi-dimensional approach in the teaching

3


--- Page 4 ---
and learning of English Language addressing the cognitive, psycho-motor, affective and digital domains, thereby
supporting the comprehensive growth and development of learners. Focused on grades 3 to 7, it prepares learners to
apply language skills across various learning areas and life contexts. In addition, it seeks to equip learners with life-long
competencies, ensuring they are well prepared for the demands of a globally interconnected world, while preserving
their cultural identity and heritage.

1.2 Rationale

The Heritage-Based Junior English Language Syllabus is designed to foster a learner centred, interactive learning
environment, where learners can engage with and internalise essential linguistic concepts. By actively participating in
language-based activities, learners not only acquire the ability to communicate effectively, but also demonstrate these
skills in practical real-life contexts. This approach enhances learners’ appreciation of language as a means of
expression and preserving both tangible and intangible aspects of our heritage, fostering cultural pride and continuity.
Furthermore, the syllabus empowers learners with communicative competencies needed to participate confidently on
both local and global platforms. By promoting critical thinking, creativity and cultural awareness, the syllabus equips
learners with the tools to engage meaningfully in a rapidly evolving world, ensuring their readiness for the demands of
21% century communication.

The study of English Language enhances the development of skills in:

e communication

e problem-solving

e adaptability

e critical thinking

e research and scientific inquiry
e decision-making

e conflict resolution

e leadership and integrity
e innovation

e self-management

e digital literacy

e entrepreneurship

e creative thinking

e cultural awareness

1.3 Summary of Content

The Heritage-Based Junior English Language Syllabus fosters the development of the macro language skills
(listening/observing, speaking/signing, reading and writing/brailing), together with their sub skills like fluency,
pronunciation, editing and summarising. It also instils knowledge and nurtures attributes such as values, attitudes and
dispositions commensurate with the Heritage Based Curriculum. The syllabus infuses the teaching and learning of visual
and tactile skills in order to accommodate learners with diverse learning needs.


--- Page 5 ---
1.4 Assumptions

The teaching and learning of English Language assumes the following:

learners have basic listening/observing, speaking/signing, reading and writing/brailing skills.

learners have an appreciation of their tangible and intangible heritage.

learners have basic English language literacy.

learners are motivated to learn English Language.

skills acquired by leamers in their first language (L1) if not English, can be transferred to the learning of English
Language as a second language (L2).

all learners are capable of learning English Language.

learners have basic knowledge of Information and Communication Technology (ICT).

1.5 Cross Cutting Themes

The teaching and learning of English Language in the context of a Heritage-Based Curriculum should include but not be
limited to the following cross-cutting themes:

2.0

3.0

VVVVVV VV VV VV VV VV VV

gender

national heritage

children’s rights and responsibilities
child protection

sexuality

HIV/AIDS education

disaster risk management
financial literacy

health

human rights

collaboration

environmental issues

career guidance

climate change
entrepreneurship

drug and substance abuse
peace and conflict resolution
technology and digital literacy

PRESENTATION OF THE SYLLABUS

The Heritage-Based Junior English Language Syllabus is a single document comprising preamble, aims,
objectives, topics, scope and sequence, methodology, competency matrix, supporting language structures and
assessment. The scope and sequence chart shows the progression of topics from Grade 3 to Grade 7. The
competency matrix shows the breadth and depth of content to be covered. This syllabus also includes a list of
suggested methods, activities and resources

AIMS

The syllabus aims to:


--- Page 6 ---
instil knowledge and nurture values, attitudes and dispositions commensurate with the Heritage Based Curriculum

4.0

5.0

3.1 enable learners to appreciate their tangible and intangible heritage

3.2 instil Uobuntu/Unhu/Vumunhu by preparing learners for participatory citizenship, peace and sustainable
development

3.3 nurture an appreciation of English language as a means of communication

3.4 develop the macro language skills namely, listening / observing, speaking /signing, reading and writing /
brailing together with their sub skills like fluency, pronunciation, editing and summarising

3.5 enable learners to express themselves in a variety of situations that involve the use of functional
English language

3.6 enable learners to appreciate the use of English language for academic, cultural, political, religious,
social and environmental development

3.7 integrate ICT in the learning of English Language.

SYLLABUS OBJECTIVES

By the end of the junior course, learners will be able to:

41

42

43
44

45
46
47
48

demonstrate an appreciation of the use of English Language for political, religious, social,
environmental, technological and economic development

demonstrate effective listening skills to understand spoken information and facilitate meaningful
responses

speak/sign proficiently to engage meaningfully and confidently in various contexts

read written texts to enhance comprehension and critical thinking skills in problem solving, team
building and tolerance culturally relevant materials

write/ braille accurately in English for effective communication

demonstrate the use of ICT in aspects of listening, speaking, reading and writing

write/braille a variety of creative texts

explore the world’s cultural identities through digital platforms.

METHODOLOGY AND TIME ALLOCATION

5.1

Suggested Methodology

In using this syllabus, the Functional, Communicative and Multi-Sensory Approaches as well as
principles of individualisation, concreteness, totality and wholeness are recommended, operating within
the spiral framework. Using these approaches, language forms and structures are taught by using them
in various contexts rather than as isolated forms. All activities and methods should be participatory and
learner centred starting from simple to complex.

The following methods are recommended:

communicative language teaching (CLT)
demonstration

debate and discussion

individual and group presentations
drama

role play/ imitation/miming


--- Page 7 ---
e poetry

e educational tours/excursions
e e-learning

e case study

e animation

e situational language teaching/learning
e individual learning plans (IPS)
e diorama

e resource persons

e classroom-based project

e — story telling / signing

e games and quizzes

e simulation

© puppetry

e experimentation

e discovery

e gamification

5.2 Time allocation

For effective teaching of English Language, the following time allocation is recommended: Grade 3 to 7: 9
periods of 30 minutes per week.

SYLLABUS TOPICS

The teaching and learning of English Language will focus on the following:
e _Listening/Observing

e Speaking/Signing

e Reading

e Writing / Brailling


--- Page 8 ---
7.0 SCOPE AND SEQUENCE
74 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING

e The 44 English
phonemes

e Silent consonants and
vowels

e Instructions in a row

e News and stories told
from electronic media

e News and short stories
from the local
environment.

e Dictation and spelling

e True / False or Yes / No
statements

e The 44 English
phonemes
e Homophones (words with
same sound but different
spelling and meanings)
such as heal/heel, knit/
neat, herd / head.
Cardinal vowel sounds,
that is, 8 diphthongs such
as: take, make, road and
12 monophthongs such
as: rod, pot, bend, gate
(compared to the 5 sounds
in the indigenous
language)
Commands and
instructions
Statements which require
True / False answers
either absolutely (such as:
the earth is flat), or relative
to a story or description
Texts / stories from various
sources

The 44 English
phonemes

A series of
consecutive
commands or
instructions
Intensive listening:
Information
retention: Short
responses and
statements such as
true/false or yes/no
responses
Dictation:

Words and
sentences from
various texts
Listening to various
texts for
comprehension
Listening to
incomplete stories
and complete them
logically

The 44 English

phonemes
Words that have the
same initial sound
Words that have the
same terminal sound
Stress and intonation
Long and short vowel
sounds

Diphthongs
Triphthongs

Intensive listening such
as listening to utterances
or extended speech from
texts
Responses to utterances
with statements such as,
“l agree/strongly agree,
definitely/absolutely,
true/false.”
Dictation words and
sentences
Stories and news told
from electronic media

e The 44 English
phonemes

e Listening to a variety of
texts

e Responses to utterances
with emphasis on
responses such as, “I
agree/strongly agree,
definitely/absolutely,” and
justifying responses

e Dictation words and
sentences from a variety of
texts

e Summary writing

e Aural comprehension

e News and stories from
electronic media and re-
telling them

e Diphthongs

e Triphthongs

e Dictated / Signed words, Dipthongs e Aural comprehension
short sentences and Triphthongs
stories
7.2 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING



--- Page 9 ---
e Articulating / signing and
understanding words
with:

- — silent consonants
such as know, calm,
often

e silent vowels such as
feather, fruit, group

e Asking and answering the
WH- questions.

e Parts of speech

e News and storytelling e.g
short stories, folktales
and news

e Appropriate forms of
greeting, thanking,
apologising, requesting
and instructing.

e Conversation on cross-
cutting themes such as,
the environment and
natural phenomena like
weather and seasons

e Expressing mood,
attitude and emotion
using stress and
intonation or non-verbal
features.

e Dialogues

e Descriptions of people,
animals and objects.

e Articulating / signing

‘stress patterns for single

words
Direct and indirect
questions
Public speaking such as;
debates, drama,
impromptu speeches and
recitations.
Appropriate register for
social interactions.
Processes such as
cooking sadza and baking
Sequence of events
related to other learning
areas on the curriculum
such as Prize Giving Day
Descriptions of a person,
place or an object
Dialogue
Conversation on cross-
cutting themes such as,
the environment and
natural phenomena like
weather and seasons

Articulation: Stress
patterns for single words
- Intonation patterns
- Non-verbal features
Public speaking skills
- Short prepared and
impromptu speeches
on cross-cutting
themes and emerging
issues
Debate
Appropriate register in
functions such as
apologising, requesting,
agreeing and disagreeing
Processes or sequence of
events related to other
learning areas on the
curriculum
Descriptions of events,
scenes and places
Appropriate use of
grammatical structures to
convey messages
Summarising aural or
read stories

e Articulation: Fluency

markers such as tone,
pauses, pace, stress and
intonation in speech
Pronouncing words often
confused such as
bird/bed, sat/set
Appropriate registers for
online and physical
interactions

Instructions and
directions

Public speaking:

- Prepared speeches
- impromptu speeches
- Emerging issues
Story telling such as
factual and imaginary
Debate

Description of a person,
place, object, process or
sequence of events
Summarising aural or
read stories

dialogue

e Articulation: Fluency
markers such as tone,
pauses, pace, stress and
intonation in speech

e Appropriate register for

communicative situations
such as greetings, online
and physical interactions,
introductions, requests
and condolences

e Public speaking:

- Prepared speeches
- Impromptu speeches
- Emerging issues

e Debate

e Description of a person, a
place, an object, an
experience, a scene/event

e Summarising aural or read
stories

e Dialogue

7.3 TOPIC 3 READING



--- Page 10 ---
e Phonics: reading words
with silent consonants
such as knife, knock,
know, bomb, light, night

e Reading a range of
suitable texts with
numbers and pictures for
understanding and
answering of questions

e Silent reading

e Retelling texts read

e Reading fluently and with
expression

e Reading for enrichment

e Punctuation marks such
as capital letters, full
stops and question marks
in a paragraph.

e Phonics: reading
homophones such as;
fair/fare, bought/boat.

e Reading to an audience

with clarity and expression

Reading silently and

answering comprehension

questions, retelling,
miming or dramatising
passages

Skimming and scanning

Referencing skills such as:

use of the dictionary, atlas,

directory and internet for
information.

Instructions on packets

and containers of common

commodities

Reading for

comprehension.

Phonics: words with
similar ending sounds but
different spellings such as
teacher/signature
write/right

Reading for fluency and
understanding

Intensive reading of
various texts

Extensive reading of a
variety of texts

Skimming and scanning
Referencing skills: the use
of the dictionary, atlas,
directory and internet for
information

Instructions and warnings

on packets and containers

of common commodities

e Intensive reading of
various texts

e Extensive reading of a

variety of texts

Reading for fluency,

understanding and

answering questions

e Skimming and scanning
- Words in context

e Referencing skills: the use
of the dictionary, atlas,
directory, glossary and
internet for information

e Instructions and warnings
on packets and containers
of common commodities

e Intensive reading of a
variety of texts

e Extensive reading of a
variety of texts

e Reading for fluency,
understanding and
answering questions

e Skimming and scanning
through a variety of texts
such as books,
magazines, newspaper,
telephone directory,
brochures and internet

e Referencing skills: the use

of the dictionary, atlas,

directory, glossary and

internet for information

Instructions and warnings

on packets and containers

of common commodities

7.4 TOPIC 4: WRITING

e Grade 3 to 7 Nelson

e Grade 3 to 7 Nelson Script /

e Grade 3 to 7 Nelson Script /

Script / relevant Braille
contractions

e Practising hand-eye
coordination

e Parts of speech such
as; nouns, verbs,
prepositions and
adjectives in
sentences

e Guided and controlled

relevant Braille contractions

e Parts of speech such as

nouns, verbs, prepositions
and adjectives in sentences

e Sentence construction
e Comprehension questions
e Multiple choice questions

and answers on vocabulary
and grammatical structures
and comprehension.

relevant Braille contractions
Parts of speech such as nouns,
pronouns, verbs, adverbs,
prepositions, conjunctions and
adjectives in sentences and
paragraphs

Sentence construction

Formal / business and Informal
/ friendly letters
Comprehension questions

e Grade 3 to 7 Nelson Script

/ relevant Braille
contractions

e Parts of speech such as
nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adverbs, prepositions,
conjunctions and
adjectives in sentences
and paragraphs

e Sentence construction

e Formal / business and

e Grade 3 to 7 Nelson Script /

relevant Braille contractions
Parts of speech such as
nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adverbs, prepositions,
conjunctions, adjectives,
interjections and articles in
sentences and paragraphs
Sentence construction
Comprehension questions
Multiple choice

10



--- Page 11 ---
composition of
different types such
as; descriptive and
narrative

e Free compositions

e Description of people,

objects, pictures and
places.

e Friendly letter

e WH- comprehension

questions

e Dictation: words and
short sentences.

e Punctuation marks such
as; capital letter, full
stop, question mark,
exclamation mark and
apostrophe in
sentences and
paragraphs

e Summarising given texts.

e Formal / business and
Informal / friendly letters

e Composition

-controlled / guided

composition

-free descriptive and

narrative compositions

-creative writing: stories,

poems, and wall

newspapers.

Punctuation marks such as;

capital letter, full stop,

question mark, exclamation

mark and apostrophe in

sentences and paragraphs

Dictated / signed words or

short sentences

- Multiple choice

- Literal and inferential
questions in complete and
correct sentences

Language structures (Refer to

section 8.0)

Composition writing:

- controlled, guided, free
narrative and descriptive
compositions

- Report , dialogue, speech,
diaries, poetry, wall
newspapers

Completing various forms such

as indemnity, confirmation

forms, bank slips, vetting forms,
and passport forms.

Summarising a variety of text

Punctuation marks such as full

stop, question mark, comma,

semi-colon, apostrophe,
exclamation mark

Dictation and spelling

Informal / friendly letters
Comprehension questions
Multiple choice

Literal and inferential
questions in complete and
correct sentences
Language structure(Refer
to section 8.0)
Composition:

controlled, guided, free
narrative and descriptive
compositions

Report, dialogue, speech,
diaries, poetry, wall
newspapers

Summarising a variety of
text

Completing various forms
such as indemnity,
confirmation forms, bank
slips, vetting forms
Punctuation marks such
as full stop, question
mark, comma, semi-colon,
apostrophe, exclamation
mark, opening and closing
inverted commas, hyphen
Dictation and spelling

Literal and inferential
questions in complete and
correct sentences
Language structures (Refer
to section 8.0)
Composition: controlled,
guided, free narrative and
descriptive compositions
Report, dialogue, speech,
diaries, poetry, wall
newspapers

Summarising a variety of
text

Completing various forms
such as indemnity, passport
forms, confirmation forms,
bank slips, vetting forms
Announcements for
different purposes
Punctuation marks such as
full stop, question mark,
comma, semi-colon,
apostrophe, exclamation
mark, opening and closing
inverted commas, hyphen,
colon, semi-colon

Dictation and spelling

11



--- Page 12 ---
COMPETENCY MATRIX

7.5 GRADE 3 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING

LONG AND SHORT VOWEL | e distinguish words with e Long and short vowel Listening to words with long e Vowel chart
SOUNDS long and short vowel words such as: ship / and short vowel sounds e Flash cards
sounds sheep, dip / deep, slip / Sounding the long and short e ICT tools
sleep, fill /feel, pull / pool, vowel sounds made by the
full / fool and cut / cart. teacher/audio materials.
Distinguishing words with
long vowel sounds from those
with short vowel sounds
WORDS WITH SILENT e identify silent consonants |e Silent consonants such as; Identifying words with silent e Flashcards
CONSONANTS AND VOWELS and vowels in given words knot, knife, knee and consonants. e Phonetic alphabet
e articulate / sign words with know. Grouping words with the e ICT tools
silent consonants and e Silent vowel sounds such same silent vowels. e Resource persons
vowels as; laugh, load and coat.
SIMPLE INSTRUCTIONS e follow two simple e Two simple instructions Following two simple e Sentence strips
instructions in a row. such as; Thandi, kneel and instructions in a row. e ICT tools
greet your grandmother. Listening and responding e Sign posts
e Instructions for games and accurately to instruction. e Game environment
puzzles. Giving each other e Newspapers and
instructions. Magazines

Dramatising / role playing
given instructions.
Playing games(traditional and

12



--- Page 13 ---
contemporary)

NEWS AND STORY TELLING retell stories heard on e News Listening to stories e Field trips
living heritage. e Stories. -from the local environment. e Recorded stories
-about Zimbabwean heroes e Resource persons
and heroines. e Pictures of heroes and
Retelling heard stories heroines.
Role playing e ICT tools
Dramatising stories e Story books
e Blissy Symbolics
DICTATION AND SPELLING write dictated/signed e Spellings Listening to dictated/signed e ICT tools
words and sentences e Sentences words or sentences e Flash cards
Writing dictated/signed words e Sentence strips
or sentences e Work cards
Playing various spelling or
word games
RESPONSES TO respond to statements e Questions and statements Answering questions which e ICT tools
UTTERANCES which require a true / false require yes / no e Sentence strips
answer. Responding to statements e Work cards
respond to questions with true / false. e Games

which require a yes / no
answer.

GRADE 3 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING

WORDS WITH e
SILENT

CONSONANT e
AND VOWEL

SOUNDS

identify words with silent
consonant sounds
pronounce words with silent
vowel sounds

Words with silent
consonants such as; sign
and often.

Words with silent vowels
such as; feather, fruit and

Articulating / signing words with
silent consonant sounds
Grouping words with the same
silent vowel

Reciting rhymes

e Phonetic alphabet
THRASS chart and sing

along audio book.

e ICT tools
e Rhymes

13



--- Page 14 ---
group. e Flash cards
PARTS OF e use appropriate forms of Parts of speech such as; e Practising parts of speech through e Charts with different
SPEECH parts of speech in different nouns, pronouns, verbs, activities such as; drills, games, language structures
contexts adverbs, prepositions and songs and rhymes. e Flash cards
adjectives e Conducting dialogues e Games
e Presenting prepared and e Work cards
impromptu speeches on topical e Cloze passages
issues such as; pollution, gender e ICT tools
roles, children’s rights and
responsibilities using appropriate
structures.
e Completing cloze passages
NEWS AND e tell stories in sequence Short stories and news e Narrating stories e Picture stories
STORIES e report news from their Reports on local events. e Retelling stories e Newspapers
community e Reporting news and events e Story books
e Commenting on news, stories and e ICT tools
events e Rhymes
e Resource persons
e Cloze passages
MOOD, e express mood, attitude and Use of stress, intonation e Expressing mood, attitude and e Video clips
ATTITUDE AND emotions. or non-verbal features to emotions through stress, e Pictures
EMOTIONS / express mood, attitude intonation and non-verbal features e Smileys on cards
NON- VERBAL and emotions. e Dramatising relevant scenes to e Sentence strips.
FEATURES show mood, attitude and
emotions.
e Role playing relevant scenes to
show mood, attitude and emotions
QUESTIONS e ask oral questions WH- questions and their e Asking oral questions in a given e Question strips
AND e answer oral questions answers context e Flash cards
ANSWERS e Responding to WH questions e Arbitrary sound charts
orally e Story books
e Magazines
e Newspapers

14



--- Page 15 ---
Liberation war literature
ICT tools

DIALOGUES e express their opinions on e Cross-cutting themes Expressing their opinion on Pictures of sacred
identified cross cutting e Natural resources selected cross-cutting themes places
themes e Weather and seasons Talking about tangible and Weather chart
e use correct English to talk e Tangible and intangible intangible heritage in the Weather instruments
about tangible and heritage such as, hot environment. Historical write-ups of
intangible resources in their springs, and totems Conducting educational tours to sacred places
environments sacred places and landforms.
e use correct English to
discuss the importance of
conserving Zimbabwe's
natural heritage.
LANGUAGE e use appropriate language e Appropriate language for Demonstrating the appropriate ICT tools
FUNCTIONS structures for different greeting, thanking, forms of greeting, thanking, Picture stories
situations instructing, apologizing instructing, apologising and Resource persons
and requesting. requesting
Simulating use of appropriate
forms of language for greeting,
instructing, thanking, apologising
and requesting.
Distinguishing formal and informal
forms of greeting, thanking,
apologising and requesting.
DESCRIPTIONS e describe people, animals, e Descriptive words of size, Describing people, animals, plants Pictures, pointers
plants and objects. colour, shape including and objects. Variety of objects in the
their opposites and Drawing/ feeling real objects, environment
comparative forms where people and animals. chart
applicable Completing cloze passages. Sentence strips

15



--- Page 16 ---
GRADE 3 TOPIC 3: READING / SIGNING

WORDS WITH SILENT e pronounce words e Words with silent letters: e Listing words with silent e Sentence strips
CONSONANTS AND correctly - Silent consonants: consonants e Word lists
VOWELS Knife, knock, know, bomb, e Reading words with silent e Flash cards
light and night vowels e ICT tools
- Silent vowels: cough, e Constructing sentences using e Braille texts
measure and bread. words with silent consonants
and vowels
e Reading sentences using
words with silent consonants
and vowels
COMPREHENSION e read arange of texts |e Variety of texts e Reading a variety of texts e Reading texts
for understanding e Silent reading skills e Role playing characters or e Story books
events in texts read e E-books
e Answering comprehension e Reading cards
questions e Braille texts
e Retelling texts read
FLUENT READING / e read fluently / sign e Fluent reading with emphasis |e Reading aloud Reading text
PROFICIENT SIGNING proficiently with on voice projection, correct e Observing punctuation marks Story books
expression. word pronunciation, word to when reading Reading cards

word intonation, stress,
observation of punctuation
marks and appropriateness of
speed.

Proficient signing with
emphasis on hand shapes,
hand movement and non-

Pronouncing / signing words
with stress and intonation
Simulating news reading

Reading texts on ICT gadgets
Pointers

Punctuation marks chart
Braille texts

16



--- Page 17 ---
manual features

ENRICHMENT READING e read a variety of texts | e Variety of texts Playing reading games e Newspapers / magazines
for enrichment Retelling texts read e Storybooks
Dramatising texts read e E-books
e Braille texts
e Large print books
PUNCTUATION MARKS e observe punctuation |e Capital letters, full stops, Observing punctuation marks |e Charts with punctuation

marks when reading

question marks, commas and
paragraphs.

in a text.
Punctuating sentences and
paragraphs

marks

Variety of texts
E-books, braille text
Large print books

GRADE 3 TOPIC 4: WRITING

PENMANSHIP

write letters with loops
join looped letters in
continuous writing

e Grade 3-7 Nelson Script /
relevant Braille contractions

Practising Grade 3 - 7
Nelson Script / relevant
Braille contractions

Grade 3 - 7 Nelson script
chart
Braille contraction chart

17



--- Page 18 ---
write legibly using the
Grade 3 - 7 Nelson Script
/ relevant Braille
contractions

Braille alphabet chart
Slate and stylus
ICT tools (jaws software)

HAND-EYE practise left fo right hand- | e Texts for transcription Transcribing texts accurately |e Texts
COORDINATION / TACTILE eye coordination / tactile | Accuracy in writing with emphasis on hand-eye |e Slate and stylus
RIGHT TO LEFT right to left Braille script coordination / tactile rightto | ICT tools (Jaws software)
COORDINATION writing movement left coordination.
PARTS OF SPEECH identify parts of speech in Parts of speech: nouns, Listing parts of speech e Charts
given texts pronouns, verbs, prepositions Using parts of speech in e Word cards
construct meaningful and adjectives (refer to context e Sentence strips
sentences using parts of section 8.0 of this syllabus) e Cloze passages
speech ICT gadgets
COMPOSITION write controlled, guided, | ¢ Samples of controlled Writing controlled, guided, e Picture or recorded
picture and free narrative compositions such as filling in picture and free narrative and guidelines
and descriptive : The name of my teacher is descriptive compositions e Cloze compositions
compositions _
My teacher is (male /
female)
e Or guided such as: What is
the name of your teacher? Is
your teacher male or female?
e Picture composition
e Free composition — writing on
a given topics
PUNCTUATION MARKS identify punctuation marks | e Punctuation marks such as Identifying punctuation marks | e Charts with punctuation
in sentences capital letters, question Discussing the use of marks
insert appropriate marks, commas and full stops punctuation marks e Chart with sign language
punctuation marks in Punctuating given work punctuation marks
sentences e A variety of texts
e E-books
LETTER WRITING outline features of an e Informal / friendly letter Stating components of an e ICT tools
informal/friendly letter format: address, date, informal / friendly letter e Sample letters

18



--- Page 19 ---
write / braille the letter
using correct format

write / braille an informal /
friendly letter using

salutation, body, closure and
signature line
Informal / friendly letter

Writing a short informal /
friendly letter of at least five
sentences using correct
format.

correct format
COMPREHENSION answer WH- e WH- questions: what, when, Discussing WH- questions e A variety of texts
comprehension questions who, why, and which together Reading texts e Chart with WH- questions
with expected answers Answering WH- questions e Sentence strips
e A variety of texts e Work cards
e Sample questions e Dictionary
DICTATION AND write / braille dictated / e Words Writing / brailling dictated / e Flash cards
SPELLING signed words correctly e Sentences signed words correctly e Sentence strips
write / braille dictated / Filling in blank spaces in e Dictionary
signed sentences sentences with correctly spelt | e ICT tools
correctly words.

GRADE 4 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING

PHONICS

identify the 44 phonemes in
English

distinguish long and short
vowel sounds such as: pull /
pool, full / fool, cut / cart /
distinguished signed words

list words that sound the same.

Coe pean em

e 20 vowel sounds

and short sounds

Identifying the 44 phonemes

24 consonant sounds in English.
e short vowel sounds e Exploring the phoneme
e Long vowel sounds machine.
e Cardinal vowels such as; u,e,i,0, | ¢ Listening to words with
€a, 00, €e, ai various sounds

THRASS chart

e Phoneme machine

e Chart with cardinal
vowels

e Word cards

e Chart with word

e Identifying words with long signs

e Pictures

19



--- Page 20 ---
Saying out words with long
and short vowel sounds.

Rhyming words on
cards

e Playing rhyming games e ICT tools
HOMOPHONES e identify words with same sound | e Words with the same sounds but e Listening to recorded words |e ICT tools
but different spelling and different spelling and meaning with same sounds but e Word cards
meaning such as; weak (veek/ | e Homophones in sign language different meaning/ observe |e Sign language
wick signed words dictionary
e group words with same sound e Identifying words with different | e Chart with
but with different spelling and meaning but same sound homophones
meaning e Grouping words with same e Cardinal vowel
sound but different spelling charts
and meaning.
SERIES OF INSTRUCTIONS e respond to given instructions in | e A series of instructions such as: e Following a series of e Instruction cards
a row Open the cupboard, collect the red instructions e Multimedia
books from the top shelf and give e Giving a series of instructions resources
them to the class monitor. in a row and following them
e Dramatising / miming or role
playing given instructions
RETENTION OF INFORMATION | e respond appropriately to e Statements which require true / false | e Listening to text read e A variety of texts
statements basing on prior answers correct / incorrect, yes/no |e Generating statements from |e ICT tools
knowledge using words true/ |e Various texts texts read e Sentence strips with
false, correct / incorrect, yes/ | News and stories from local e Responding appropriately to statements
no environment statements using the words e Resource persons
e retell news and stories heard true / false, correct / incorrect,
yes / no
e Listening to news and stories
e Playing listening games such
as: the Chinese whisper game
COMPREHENSION e retell stories read e Various stories / texts reflecting our | Listening to stories / texts e A variety of texts
e answer / sign comprehension heritage being read based on our e ICT tools
questions heritage e National Anthem
Key words and phrases e Retelling stories read e Story books
Comprehension questions e Discussing stories read e Resource books
e Answering questions from e Multimedia tools.

20



--- Page 21 ---
stories read.
DICTATION AND SPELLING e write /braille dictated words e Words for dictation e Discussing meanings and e Recorded texts
e write /braille dictated sentences | e Short sentences for dictation usage of words to be dictated | e Sentence strips
e spell dictated words e Short stories for dictation e Writing dictated words and e Flash cards
stories e ICT tools
e Peer dictation
e Word sorting
GRADE 4 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING
PHONICS e pronounce words with correct | e Various texts e Practising pronunciation e Word cards
stress and intonation e Selected words for stress |e Identifying different combinations of vowels and |e Dictionaries
e blend sounds to form words. and intonation consonants in words such as: au, ei, ea, bi--lb, |e ICT tools
e segment words to identify Sk- -ks
vowel and consonant sounds e Segmenting words to identify vowel and
consonant sounds.
DIRECT AND e ask direct and indirect e Questions based on the e Discussing the structure of direct and indirect e National Flag
INDIRECT questions in long and short National Heritage questions e Calendar with public
QUESTIONS forms e Direct questions such as e Asking and answering direct and indirect holidays
e respond to direct and indirect What is your name? | questions. e Coat of Arms
questions in long and short What’s your name? e ICT tools

forms

Indirect questions such as |
want to know your name

Local Heritage Sites

PUBLIC SPEAKING e

express opinions on topical
issues using correct English

Debate topics
Discussion topics

Identifying topical issues
Holding / engaging in debates

Pictures of informal
traders

e
e
e Impromptu speech topics |e Conducting discussions on topical issues e Charts
e Participating in public speaking on topical issues | e Recordings
e Reciting poems on topical issues e Video clips
e Presenting on various topics. e Pamphlets
e Resource person
REGISTERS e use appropriate registers for | e Appropriate registers for e Demonstrating appropriate registers in given e ICT tools
various functions such as various social interactions situations online or physical interactions. e Pictures

21



--- Page 22 ---
greeting, making

introductions, apologising,

such as; greetings,
introductions, apologies,

Practising dialogues
Role playing social interactions

Social media platforms
Cards such as

requesting and requests and Christmas cards
congratulating congratulations
SEQUENCING e narrate events and Appropriate experiments e Explaining experiments and processes e ICT tools

processes logically such as: transpiration and |e Outlining stages of a process using time e Resource persons
filtration of water connectors e Appropriate apparatus
Processes such as cooking | e Reporting logically on public occasions relating and ingredients
sadza and baking to their own experiences e Pictures
Appropriate time e Recipes
connectors eg; firstly,
secondly, lastly and finally

DESCRIPTION e describe people, places, Descriptive words and e Listing descriptive words and phrases e Pictures of heritage
scenes and events phrases (adjectives) e Describing people, scenes, events and places sites

Description of people,

places, scenes and events

such as heritage sites.

Pictures / video clips of
National events
Pictures / video clips of
social gatherings

e Audio clips
e Resource persons
DIALOGUE e dialogue confidently using Dialogue on a variety of e Practising conversations on given real life e Pictures
appropriate registers on real life situations eg; First situations. e Videos
given topics day at school between e Demonstrating turn taking skills in a dialogue. e ICT tools
teacher and learner, nurse | e Articulating issues confidently. e Chart with dialogues
and a patient e Demonstrating empathy and other emotions e Props for different
appropriately. occupations
GRADE 4 TOPIC 3: READING / SIGNING

PHONICS °

identify words with same
sounds but different

Homophones such as fair /

fare and boat/ bought

Reading words with same sounds but different
spellings and meanings.

Word cards
Charts

22



--- Page 23 ---
meanings e Grouping words with same sounds. e ICT tools
e Language sign charts
e Cardinal vowels charts
FLUENT READING read a variety of texts fluently | e A variety of texts e Demonstrating fluent reading / proficient signing |e Word cards
with appropriate expressions - Fluent reading skills e Identifying punctuation marks in texts e ICT tools
and emotions such as voice projection, e Pronouncing words correctly in given texts e Story books
pronunciation, intonation, e Sentence strips
stress, speed and e Chart with punctuation
observation of punctuation marks
marks. e A variety of texts
- — Proficient signing skills e Braille texts
such as, hand shapes,
hand movements and
non-manual features.
COMPREHENSION read a range of suitable texts | e A variety of texts e Skimming to get the gist of texts. e Story books
with understanding e Skimming and scanning e Reading a variety of heritage related texts. e A variety of texts
answer comprehension skills e Scanning for given information in a text. e Braille texts
questions correctly e Comprehension questions | e Retelling stories in sequence e Large print books
e Key words and phrases e Answering comprehension questions. e Brailler / Embosser
e Role playing characters in a text.
REFERENCING apply referencing skills for e Use of the directory, e Finding information from a directory, dictionary, | ¢ ICT tools
various purposes internet, dictionary, atlas atlas, maps, glossary and internet. e Dictionary
and maps for information |e Scanning for information from reference e Atlas / Maps
materials e Directory
FUNCTIONAL read instructions on packets |e Instructions, symbols and |e Reading symbols, warnings and instructions e Packets and
READING and containers such as warnings on different e Interpreting symbols and instructions containers
pesticides and medication containers e suggesting ways of storing dangerous packages |e Charts
apply functional reading skills | e Functional reading from e Multimedia resources
in daily life. the local environment e.g. e Large prints
observe symbols on packets instructions on packets and e Braille texts

and containers

containers of commodities.

23



--- Page 24 ---
GRADE 4 TOPIC 4: WRITING

PENMANSHIP e write legibly using Grade 3- | e Grade 3-7 Nelson Script. e Practising writing letters of the e Grade 3-7 Nelson
(HANDWRITING) 7 Nelson Script alphabet using Grade 3 - 7 Nelson Script handwriting chart
Script e Braille chart
e Writing words and sentences using |e  Brailler/ Embosser
the Grade 3 - 7 Nelson Script
PARTS OF SPEECH e construct sentences usinga | e Parts of speech such as: verbs, e Identifying parts of speech ina given | e A variety of texts
variety of parts of speech nouns, adverbs and adjectives in text e Chart with parts of
e identify parts of speech in a context. (refer to section 8.0 of e Using parts of speech in context speech
given text this syllabus) e Writing correct sentences using e Word cards
selected parts of speech. e ICT tools
SENTENCE e construct grammatically e Basic sentence pattern (subject + | e Identifying the basic elements ofa | Sentence strips
CONSTRUCTION correct sentences (subject + verb + object) sentence (subject + verb + object) |e ICT tools
verb + object) e Sentence construction e Constructing simple sentences e Games
e Scrambled / jumbled
sentences.
COMPREHENSION e read given texts or pictures |e A variety of texts e Reading comprehension passages |e Story books
e answer a variety of e Comprehension questions. e Listening to passages read e Comprehension
comprehension questions e Answering comprehension passages
questions. e Dictionary
e ICT gadgets
SUMMARY e read given passages. e A vvariety of texts e Reading given texts e Word cards
e identify main ideas from e Listening to passages read / stories | e Story books
texts told e E-books
e summarise given texts e Writing summaries of given texts or |e ICT tools
stories told. e A variety of texts
COMPOSITION e write / braille controlled, e Controlled compositions such as: | ¢ Arranging main ideas in e Charts

24



--- Page 25 ---
sentences correctly.

guided, free narrative and The name of our school head is chronological order Samples of
descriptive compositions ___. Ourheadis___. (female / Writing topic sentences and compositions
male) supporting developers. Pictures
e Guided compositions e.g. Writing controlled, guided and free Sentence strips
pictures, charts and guidelines. compositions ICT tools
e Free compositions- writing about
topical issues such as aspects of
our heritage issues
e Poems
LETTER WRITING outline features of a e Features of formal and informal Stating components of informal / ICT tools
formal/business letter letters friendly and formal/business letter Sample letters
identify the differences and - Informal letter layout Stating differences and similarities Charts
similarities between formal One address, date, salutation, between formal and informal letter
and informal letters body, ending, block writing
write/braille informal/friendly paragraphing Writing informal / friendly and
and formal/business letter - Formal letter layout formal/ business letters using
using correct format - Two addresses, date, correct format.
salutation, reference, body,
ending (Yours
faithfully/sincerely), block
paragraphing
PUNCTUATION identify punctuation marks in | e Punctuation marks such as: Identifying punctuation marks in Charts with punctuation
written text question marks, capital letters, written texts. marks
explain appropriate use of commas, exclamation marks, Discussing the use of punctuation Written texts
punctuation marks apostrophe and full stops. marks Sentence strips
use punctuation marks Punctuation marks and their uses Punctuating sentences. ICT tools
appropriately e Punctuation marks in context.
DICTATION AND SPELLING dictated / signed words e Words and sentences. Dictating words and sentences ICT tools
correctly Writing correct spellings of dictated Flash cards
write dictated / signed words and sentences. Sentence strips

GRADE 5 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING

25



--- Page 26 ---
PHONICS distinguish the 44 phonemes |e The 44phonemesinEnglish. | e Differentiating the 44 phonemes in English. e Phonetic alphabet
in English. -20 vowel sounds such as /oo/ | e Listening to different texts read e A variety of texts
-20 vowel sounds /ael lee/ e Exploring the phoneme machine. e ICT tools
-24 consonant sounds. -24 consonant sounds such as | e Articulating words with diphthong and e Phoneme machine
articulate words with Ib/, Im/, Hf, Ig/, Inf Igr/, lor! triphthong sounds
diphthong and triphthong e Stress patterns for two or
sounds more syllabic words.
pronounce words with correct |e diphthongs and triphthongs.
stress and intonation
SERIES OF respond to more than three e Aseries of instructions/ e Listening to/observing a set of given e Pictures
INSTRUCTIONS/ given instructions/ commands commands such as: Stand up, instructions/ commands e Recordings of
COMMANDS in a row jump around, clap your hands | e Responding appropriately to a set of given instruction/ commands
and sit instructions/ commands e Instruction cards
e Role playing e ICT tools
INTENSIVE respond appropriately to e Short responses such as e Answering questions using short responses |e Recordings
LISTENING questions using words such as true/false, it’s true/it isn’t true, e Charts
true/false, yes/no, yes/no, yes it is/no it isn’t, e Pictures
correct/incorrect correct/ incorrect e.g Mbuya
Nehanda took part in the first
Chimurenga. (True/false)
LISTENING read a variety of texts and e A variety of texts and stories |e Listening to a variety of texts read orplayed |e Various texts
COMPREHENSION stories or audio materials. or audio materials. including those depicting aspects of our e ICT tools
e Key words and phrases tangible and intangible heritage e Reading cards
respond appropriately to e Comprehension questions e Answering questions e Question strips
questions from different texts e Miming actions from texts read.
heard.
DICTATION AND write dictated words and e Words and sentences. e Listening and writing dictated words and e Dictionary
SPELLING sentences correctly. sentences e Crossword puzzles
e Playing spelling games such as the Spelling |e A variety of texts
Bee game and the Treasure hunt game e ICT tools
LISTENING TO complete stories logically e Incomplete stories e Listening to incomplete stories including e Pictures
INCOMPLETE those depicting aspects of our tangible and e ICT tools
STORIES intangible heritage. e Story books

26



--- Page 27 ---
e Completing stories
e Dramatising possible endings of the story

GRADE 5 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING

ARTICULATION e pronounce words Stress patterns for single words e Pronouncing/signing words correctly |e Sign language charts
correctly/sign words such as factory, driver, doctor e Practising reading news e Sign language
accurately Intonation patterns e Recording learners speaking/signing alphabet

Non-verbal features and playing back the recordings. e ICT tools
e Multimedia tools

PUBLIC SPEAKING e express themselves Public speaking skills such as self- | e Displaying public speaking skills e A variety of texts
confidently before an expression, clarity, posture, voice |e Making notes for prepared speech e Recordings
audience projection, gestures and e Rehearsing for public speaking e Resource persons

e present prepared and confidence e Reciting poems e ICT tools
impromptu speeches. Prepared and impromptu e Researching on topical issues.
speeches on cross-cutting themes
and topical issues

DEBATE e express themselves in correct Debating procedures e Outlining debate procedures e A variety of texts
English through debate on Debating skills such as confidence, | e Discussing topical and other issues |e Resource persons
topical and other issues clarity, coherence of ideas, eye e Analysing views of other learners e Recordings

contact, tone, strategic e Holding debates and shows on e ICT tools
competence and guiding notes topical and other issues
Non-verbal features e Engaging in school-based or cluster-

based debate seminars

REGISTERS e use appropriate registers to Appropriate registers for e Demonstrating the appropriate ways |e Pictures
express themselves in communicative situations such as of expressing ideas in different e Comic books
different situations persuading, complimenting and communicative situations such as e Magazine/ newspaper

requesting e.g. May /...., persuading, complimenting, articles
Please..... requesting and resolving conflicts. e ICT tools
SEQUENCING e describe various processes Processes such as vegetable e Identifying appropriate linking words |e Resource persons

27



--- Page 28 ---
using cohesive devices growing, broiler rearing, cooking e Describing different processes using | e Pictures
appropriately e.g firstly, and compost making appropriate cohesive devices e A variety of texts
secondly, then, after that, e Multimedia tools.
lastly
DESCRIPTIONS e use correct adjectives to e Descriptive words of events, e Outlining descriptive words, their e Pictures
describe events, scenes and scenes and places and their comparatives and superlatives e Chart with descriptive
places. comparatives and superlatives e Describing events, scenes and words and signs
places e Recorded descriptions
e Completing cloze passages of places, events and
scenes
CONVEYING MESSAGES | e use the correct language e Direct and indirect speech. e Practising direct and indirect speech | Picture stories
structures to convey - He/she wants (someone) to |e Conveying messages in pairs/groups | e Instruction cards
messages go to town e Games on conveying messages. e ICT tools
- He/she says (that).......
- He/she meane.......
- _ He/she is saying that......
SUMMARISING STORIES | e summarise stories e A variety of texts and audio e Identifying main ideas/points e ICT tools
materials. e Organizing information logically e Story books
e Retelling stories e Resource persons
e Paraphrasing

GRADE 5 TOPIC 3: READING

WORDS WITH THE SAME | e read words with the same e Words with the same ending e Reading texts e A variety of texts
ENDING SOUND AND ending sound but different sounds but different spellings such | e Identifying words with the same e Reading cards
DIFFERENT SPELLING spelling as signature/teacher, ending sound but different spelling e ICT tools

e read given texts stationery/stationary e Grouping words with the same e Braille text

28


--- Page 29 ---
identify words with same
ending sounds but different
spellings from given passages

ending sound but different spelling

Talking books
Large print texts

READING FOR FLUENCY | e read texts fluently Fluent reading skills such as Identifying and observing punctuation | e A variety of texts
intonation, stress, punctuation, marks in a text e Chart with punctuation
word recognition, word attack and Pronouncing words from a given text marks
pronunciation/hand shape, accurately e Braille texts
movement and location when Imitating a news reader e Talking books
signing Demonstrating reading accurately, | Large print texts

confidently, fluently with appropriate |e ICT tools
speed
SKIMMING AND e skim and scan through a text A variety of texts Identifying main points in read texts. | A variety of texts
SCANNING e surf information A variety of question types such as Evaluating e Braille texts
e answer comprehension closed, open ended and multiple Answering comprehension questions | e Talking books
questions choice e Large print texts
e ICT tools
INTENSIVE READING e read texts silently A variety of texts Reading texts silently e A variety of texts
e identify new words in texts Contextual meaning of words Identifying new words in given texts |e ICT tools
e give contextual meanings of Key words and phrases Giving contextual meanings of words | e Braille texts
words read e Talking books
e Large print texts
e Word cards
EXTENSIVE READING e read a variety of texts for A variety of texts Reading a variety of texts silently e A variety texts
leisure Contextual meaning of words including those depicting aspects of |e ICT tools
e give contextual meanings of Key words and phrases our tangible and intangible heritage |e Word cards
words from a variety of texts Identifying new words in given texts |e Large print books
Giving contextual meanings of words | e Braille texts
read
REFERENCING e use referencing skills to find Information from: directories, Finding information from various e Reference sources

information from different
sources

dictionaries, atlases, maps,
encyclopedias, internet, table of
contents, indices and glossary
sections

reference materials

Applying referencing skills in different
learning areas and situations e.g
when looking up a contact in the
phonebook or when giving/looking for

such as dictionaries,
directories, atlases,
maps, encyclopedias,
internet, table of
contents, indices and

29



--- Page 30 ---
directions glossary sections
e ICT tools
WARNINGS AND e read instructions, warnings e Warnings on containers and Reading warnings and instructions e Pictures of containers
INSTRUCTIONS and symbols on containers packets of different commodities on packets of different commodities |e ICT tools
and packets e Instructions on containers and Interpreting instructions and warnings | e Charts
e explain the meanings of packets of different commodities on packets of different commodities | Empty packets of
instructions, warnings and Answering questions on instructions commodities
symbols on containers and and warnings on packets of different
packets commodities
GRADE 5 TOPIC 4: WRITING / BRAILLING
PENMANSHIP e write legibly following the e Letters of the alphabet Shaping letters of the alphabet e Alphabet chart
(HANDWRITING) Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/ e Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/ Braille Demonstrating letter formation e Braille alphabet
relevant braille contractions alphabet and contractions Observing the Grade 3-7 Nelson e Nelson script chart
script handwriting on the charts e Braille contraction
Practising the Grade 3-7 Nelson sheets
script/ modelling braille writing e Sign language
alphabet
PARTS OF SPEECH e identify parts of speech ina e Parts of speech such as: verbs, Identifying parts of speech ina given | e A variety of texts
given text nouns, pronouns, prepositions, text e Charts
e construct sentences using conjunctions, adverbs and Using parts of speech in context e Word cards
parts of speech adjectives in context. (refer to Writing correct sentences using e ICT tools
section 8.0 of this syllabus) selected parts of speech. e Multimedia tools
SENTENCE e construct grammatically e Basic sentence pattern (subject + Identifying the basic elements of a e Word cards
CONSTRUCTION correct sentences (subject + verb + object) sentence (subject + verb + object) e Sentence strips
verb + object) e Compound and complex Constructing simple sentences e ICT tools
sentences Constructing sentences incorporating | e Games
various parts of speech e.g (The tall | e Scrambled / jumbled
boy is sitting on a small chair) sentences.

Constructing compound and complex
sentences

30



--- Page 31 ---
LETTER WRITING identify the differences and Features of formal and informal e Stating components of informal / e ICT tools
similarities between letters friendly and formal/business letters e Sample letters
formal/ousiness and - Informal letter layout e Identifying differences and similarities | e Charts
informal/friendly letters One address, date, salutation, between formal and informal letter
write/braille informal/friendly body, ending, block writing
and formal/business letters paragraphing e Writing informal / friendly and formal/
amplify given guidelines - Formal letter layout business letters using correct format.

- Two addresses, date, salutation, | « Amplifying given guidelines to write a
reference, body, ending (Yours letter
faithfully/sincerely), block
paragraphing

Formal and informal letters on

issues such as invitations,

requests, applications, complaints

etc

Letter guidelines

COMPOSITION write controlled, guided and Structure of a composition: e Outlining a composition framework e Sample poems
free compositions using Introduction, body (developmental | ¢ Writing controlled, guided and free e Sample compositions
correct language structures paragraphs) and conclusion compositions including those e Pictures
write poems, stories, reports, Paragraphing skills such as use of depicting aspects of our tangible and | e CT tools
speeches, dialogues and topic sentences, developers and intangible heritage e Diaries
diaries using appropriate terminators e Sequencing given pictures and e Magazines
language structures Cohesive devices (words that writing compositions based on the

make a paragraph flow such as at pictures
first, and later, then, finally) e Recording significant activities in
Format and elements of: diaries
- Poems e Composing poems on topical issues
- Reports and reading or reciting them to others
- Speeches e Compiling school magazine articles
-Dialogues e Writing reports, dialogues and
speeches
COMPLETING FORMS complete various forms A variety of forms such as deposit | e Reading instructions ona variety of |e ICT tools

accurately

and withdrawal slips, vetting, bio
data, indemnity, medical aid,
application forms and online

forms
Completing various forms

e A variety of forms

31



--- Page 32 ---
surveys

COMPREHENSION read a variety of texts for e A variety of texts e Reading various texts e A variety of texts
comprehension e Comprehension questions e Answering comprehension questions | e Charts
give contextual meaning of e Meanings of words in context in complete and correct sentences e Braille books
new words e Unfamiliar words e Answering multiple choice questions | e Pictures
answer multiple choice e Working out contextual meanings of | ¢ Work cards
questions words and using them in own e Large print books
answer questions in complete sentences e Talking book
and correct sentences
use new words in own
sentences
SUMMARY WRITING identify main points from a e Note making e Reading a variety of texts e A variety of texts
variety of texts e Summary aspects such as e Identifying main ideas from texts read | e Samples of summaries
summarise a variety of texts - Appropriate title for a given e Making notes using the main ideas e Charts on punctuation
passage from texts read marks
- The main ideas of a passage e Providing titles for passages e Note books
- Grammatical accuracy and e Writing summaries of short stories | ¢ Braille texts
punctuation and newspaper articles in sequential | e Work cards
- Sequencing of ideas order e Word cards
- Length of the summary as given © Talking books
in words e Large print texts
PUNCTUATION punctuate sentences using e Punctuation marks e Identifying punctuation marks in texts | e Charts with
inverted commas, - Inverted commas e Reading texts and observing the use punctuation marks
exclamation marks, capital - Exclamation mark of punctuation marks e A variety of texts
letters, question marks, - Hyphen e Demonstrating use of punctuation e Sentence strips
apostrophe and hyphen - Capital letters marks e Braille books
- Question marks e Punctuating given paragraphs and
- Apostrophe sentences
LANGUAGE use various language e Conjunctions, quantifiers, e Identifying the language structures in | e A variety of texts
STRUCTURES structures in a variety of intensifiers, question tags, texts e Sentence strips
context neither...nor/either...or e Explaining how the various language | e Charts
(Refer to section 8.0 of this structures are used in sentences e Work cards
syllabus) e Writing sentences using the e Braille texts
language structures correctly e Word cards

32



--- Page 33 ---
e Multimedia resources
DICTATION AND write /braille dictated words e Words, sentences and short e Listening to texts or audio material e Dictionary
SPELLING write /braille dictated stories e Reading texts e A variety of texts
sentences e Writing dictated words, sentences e Flash cards
spell dictated words and stories e Braille punctuation
mark sheet
e Recorded text
e Sentence strips
e ICT tools
e Spelling games
GRADE 6 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING
PHONICS distinguish the 44 English e The 44 English phonemes e differentiating various phonetic e various texts
phonemes 20 Vowel sounds sounds e braille books
24 consonant sounds e listening to different texts e recordings
distinguish different sounds in e listing words with long and short e ICT tools
a set of given words e words that have the same initial vowel sounds e Phonic programmes
classify words according to sound such as pick/pink e listening to different stress and e Rhyming games
initial sounds e words that have the same terminal intonation patterns e Phoneme machine

identify words with the same
terminal sounds

identify rhyming words
pronounce words with correct
stress and intonation

contrast words with long and

sound such as sink/think,
dress/chess

long and short vowel sounds such
as fill/feel, sit/seat, bit/beat

stress and intonation

diphthongs such as side, gate, why

identifying diphthongs and
triphthongs from a list of words
playing rhyming games

33



--- Page 34 ---
short vowel sounds

triphthongs such as quiet, choir

e articulate words with
diphthong and triphthong
sounds
INTENSIVE LISTENING e respond appropriately to an e Poems, rhymes, utterances and Listening to utterances/observing e Songs
utterance instructions signs and responding appropriately e Large print books
e repeat utterances Retelling stories heard e Recordings
e recite heard poems, rhymes Reciting poems and rhymes including | e ICT tools
and lyrics those depicting aspects of our e Poems and rhymes
e ask questions for clarity tangible and intangible heritage e Audio content
Reciting and singing words of songs
Asking questions seeking clarification
on content from other learning areas
RESPONSES TO e respond appropriately to given | e Responses using words such as Listening and responding to e ICT tools
STATEMENTS AND statements surely, definitely, absolutely, agree statements appropriately e Recordings
QUESTIONS e justify responses given e.g. it is cold today, | agree/I Giving reasons for theirresponses_ | e Work cards
e identify purpose, tone and strongly agree/disagree
attitude of statements e Justification of responses given
e.g. Is Mr. Moyo a good teacher?
- Response: Definitely!
- Justification: His learners are
always passing.
- Evaluation of statements
DICTATION AND e spell words and sentences e Words and sentences Listening and writing dictated words |e Flash cards
SPELLING correctly and sentences e Dictionary
Playing spelling games e Crossword puzzles
e A variety of texts
e ICT tools
LISTENING TO e narrate topical issues heard e Topical issues Listening to electronic media e Electronic media
ELECTRONIC MEDIA over the electronic media programmes e Recordings

rephrase sentences from
audio or video texts

Articulating information heard over
electronic media

Discussing issues heard on
electronic media

34



--- Page 35 ---
LISTENING
COMPREHENSION

read stories or texts
answer comprehension
questions

Variety of texts
Questions

Listening to stories told or texts read
including those depicting aspects of
our tangible and intangible heritage
Responding to comprehension
questions

Dramatising texts heard

A variety of texts
Question strips
Resource persons

GRADE 6 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING

ARTICULATION e pronounce or sign words e Fluency markers such as tone, e Discussing/signing topical issues e Sign language charts
correctly pauses, intonation, stress and pace | e Conducting debates e Sign language
e Use appropriate gestures in | e Communicative competencies such |e Reciting poems alphabet
speech as non-verbal and socio-cultural e Presenting impromptu speeches on |e Multimedia tools
features topical issue using appropriate e Word Cards
gestures
REGISTERS e use appropriate register to |e Appropriate register for e Demonstrating the appropriate ways | e Pictures
express themselves in communicative situations using word of expressing ideas in different e Comic books
different situations such as: May I...., Excuse me...., communicative situations either e Magazine/ newspaper
Please....., 'm sorry... online or physical interactions articles
e Applying registers in simulations of |e Multimedia resources
real life situations
PRONUNCIATION e pronounce/sign distinctly e Homophones such as e Reading and extracting confusing e ICT tools
pairs of words often steal/steel/still, bad/bird/bed, pat/pet, words from texts e Word cards
confused e Correctly pronouncing words that are | e Sign language charts
often confused e.g bad/bird e Pictures
INSTRUCTIONS AND e give instructions and e Directions and instructions using e Giving each other directions to follow | e Compasses
DIRECTIONS directions phrases such as e Following given directions and e Chart with compass
e follow instructions and - turn left, instructions points
directions - go straight, e Google maps
- turn south, e Maps
- south of, e ICT tools
- to the north of e Local environment

35



--- Page 36 ---
- on the left-hand side

PUBLIC SPEAKING express themselves A variety of topics e Reciting poems e A variety of texts
confidently before an Cross-cutting themes and topical e Researching on topical issues. e Recordings
audience issues e Structuring content chronologically. | « Resource persons
research on topical issues e Displaying public speaking skills e Multimedia resources.
structure content e Rehearsing for public speaking
present prepared and
impromptu speeches
DEBATE express themselves A variety of topics e Outlining debate procedures e A variety of texts
confidently before an Cross-cutting themes and topical e Discussing topical and other issues | e Resource persons
audience issues e Analysing views of other learners e Recordings
research on topical issues Debating procedures e Holding debates and shows on e Multimedia resources.
structure content Debating skills such as confidence, topical and other issues
sustain discussions or clarity, coherence of ideas, eye e Engaging in school-based or cluster-
arguments on topical and contact, tone, gestures, strategic based debate seminars
other issues. competence and guiding notes
Argument sustenance markers such
as:
- Therefore,
- Thus,
- Subsequently,
- Nevertheless,
- Apparently,
STORY TELLING tell stories in a coherent Stories: factual, narrative or e Narrating folktales, factual narratives | e Various texts
manner imaginary with appropriate expressions e Pictures
re-tell stories Aspects of a story (paralinguistic skill) e Charts
summarising stories - Story telling skills such as: e Re-telling stories from a variety of e Multimedia resources

- Voice modulation
- Gestures

- Sequencing

- Coherence

Summary

texts

Discussing aspects of stories such
as plot, theme, setting, title and
character

Paraphrasing using own words in
brief and to the point

Organising information logically.

36



--- Page 37 ---
DESCRIPTIONS e use correct adjectives to e Descriptive words of processes, e Completing cloze passages e Pictures
describe processes, events, scenes and places and their | e Describing processes, events, e Chart
events, scenes and places. comparatives and superlatives scenes and places e Multimedia resources
e Words depicting sequence suchas |e Demonstrating processes such as e Recipes
after, later, firstly, finally compost making, baking, harnessing | e Large print books
e Processes such as compost making, donkeys
harnessing donkeys, baking
GRADE 6 TOPIC 3: READING
INTENSIVE READING | e read various texts for detail e A vvariety of texts e Reading a variety of texts for detail | A variety of texts
e increase their sight vocabulary | e Vocabulary e Identifying the setting, maintheme, |e ICT tools
for information and knowledge |e Aspect ofa story such as: plot, main and minor characters from | e Braille texts
e analyse and evaluate - Theme(s) texts e Talking books
information from texts read - Main idea(s) e Outlining the sequence of eventsin |e Large print texts
- Plot (sequence of events) the text e Word cards
- Characters e Constructing sentences using e Dictionaries
- Setting (time and place) vocabulary and structures selected | Glossaries
from texts e Atlases
e Compiling vocabulary notebooks e Indices
e Writing notes and summaries of texts
e Analysing texts.
EXTENSIVE READING |e read a variety of texts for e A variety of texts e Reading a variety of texts silently e A variety texts
leisure e Contextual meaning of words e inferring contextual meanings of e ICT tools
e infer contextual meanings of words read e Word cards
words from a variety of texts e Large print books
e Braille texts
e Multimedia resources.
SKIMMING AND e skim through a text e A variety of texts e Skimming through texts to get the e A variety of texts
SCANNING e scan through a text e A variety of question types such as gist e Braille texts
e answer comprehension closed, open ended and multiple e Scanning through texts for main e Talking books
questions choice points e Large print texts

Playing reading games

37



--- Page 38 ---
Answering comprehension questions | e ICT tools
READING FOR read texts fluently within a A variety of texts Identifying and observing punctuation | e A variety of texts
FLUENCY specified time marks in a text e Chart
read with expression. Pronouncing words from a given text | e Braille texts
observe punctuation marks accurately e Talking books
when reading Expressing feelings when reading e Large print texts
read passages without through the use of intonation and e ICT tools
regressing non-verbal cues
read with stress and intonation Imitating a news reader
Demonstrating reading accurately,
confidently, fluently with appropriate
speed
INSTRUCTIONS AND read instructions, warnings and Warnings on containers and Reading warnings on packets of e Pictures
WARNINGS symbols on containers and packets of different commodities different commodities e ICT tools
packets Instructions on containers and Reading instructions on packets of e Empty containers
explain the meanings of packets of different commodities different commodities e Multimedia resources
instructions, warnings and Interpreting instructions and
symbols on containers and warnings on packets of different
packets commodities
Answering questions on instructions
and warnings on packets of different
commodities
REFERENCING use referencing skills to find Referencing sources Finding information from various e Reference sources

information from different
sources

reference materials

Applying referencing skills in different
learning areas and situations e.g
when looking up a contact in the
phonebook or when giving/looking for
directions

such as dictionaries,
directories, atlases,
maps, encyclopedias,
internet, table of
contents, indices and
glossary sections

ICT tools

GRADE 6 TOPIC 4: WRITING

38



--- Page 39 ---
PENMANSHIP (HANDWRITING)

write legibly following the
Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/
relevant braille contractions

Letters of the alphabet
Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/
Braille alphabet and
contractions

Shaping letters of the alphabet
Demonstrating letter formation
Observing the Grade 3-7 Nelson
script handwriting on the charts
Practising the Grade 3-7 Nelson

Alphabet chart
Braille alphabet
Nelson script chart
Braille contraction
sheets

script/ modelling braille writing e Sign language alphabet
PARTS OF SPEECH e identify modals in texts e Modals such as may, might, e Writing sentences using modals |e charts
e use modals in sentences can, could, will, shall and ought correctly e avariety of texts
to (refer to section 8.0 of this e braille books
syllabus) e large print books
e ICT Tools
PARTS OF SPEECH e identify parts of speechina |e Parts of speech such as: e Identifying parts of speech in a e A variety of texts
given text verbs, nouns, pronouns, given text e Charts
e construct sentences using prepositions, conjunctions, e Using parts of speech in context |e Word cards
parts of speech adverbs and adjectives in e Writing correct sentences using |e ICT tools
context. (refer to section 8.0 of selected parts of speech. e Multimedia tools
this syllabus)
LETTER WRITING e write/braille informal/friendly |e Formal and informal letters e Writing informal / friendly and e ICT tools
and formal/business letter of | e E-mail. formal/ business letters using e Sample letters
the required length -components of an email. correct format. e Letter format charts
e compose an email e Responding to letters and
advertisements using appropriate
language structures (registers)
e Composing e-mails
COMPOSITION e write controlled, guided and |e Structure of a composition: e Outlining a composition Sample poems

free compositions using
correct language structures
use appropriate language
structures to write poems,
stories, reports, speeches,
dialogues and diaries

Introduction, body
(developmental paragraphs)
and conclusion

Paragraphing skills such as
use of topic sentences,
developers and terminators
Cohesive devices (words that

framework

Writing controlled/guided and free
compositions

Sequencing given pictures and
writing compositions based on the
pictures

Recording significant activities in

Sample compositions
Pictures

ICT tools

Diaries

Magazines

39



--- Page 40 ---
make a paragraph flow such as

at first, and later, then, finally)
Format and elements of:
- Poems

diaries

Composing poems on topical
issues and reading or reciting
them to others

- Reports e Compiling school magazine
- Speeches articles
- Dialogues e Writing reports, dialogues and
speeches
COMPREHENSION e read a variety of texts for Variety of texts e Reading various texts including |e A variety of texts
comprehension e Key words and phrases those depicting aspects of our e Charts
e give contextual meaning of tangible and intangible heritage |e Braille books
unfamiliar e Answering comprehension e Pictures
e answer multiple choice questions in complete and correct | e Work cards
questions sentences e Large print books
e answer questions in e Answering multiple choice e Multimedia Tools
complete and correct questions
sentences e Working out contextual meanings
e use new words in own of words and using them in own
sentences sentences
SUMMARY WRITING e identify main points e Variety of texts e Reading a variety of texts e A variety of texts
e summarise a variety of texts e Identifying main ideas from texts |e Samples of summaries
read e Charts on punctuation
e Making notes using the main marks
ideas from texts read e Notebooks
e Sequencing of ideas e Braille texts
e Providing titles for passages e Work cards
e Maintaining stipulated length of e Word cards
the summary as given in words e Talking books
e Writing summaries of short e Large print texts
stories and newspaper articles in
sequential order
LANGUAGE STRUCTURES e use various language e Conjunctions, quantifiers, e Identifying language structures e A variety of texts
structures for effective intensifiers, question tags, e Demonstrating how the various e Sentence strips
communication neither...nor/either...or language structures are usedin |e Charts

40



--- Page 41 ---
(Refer to section 8.0 of this sentences e Work cards
syllabus) Writing sentences using the e Braille texts
language structures correctly e Word cards
e Multimedia resources
PUNCTUATION punctuate sentences and Punctuation marks Punctuating given paragraphs e Charts
paragraphs appropriately. - Full stop and sentences e A variety of texts
- Inverted commas e Sentence strips
- Exclamation mark e Braille books
- Hyphen e Multimedia resources
- Capital letters
- Semi colon
- Colon
- Question mark
COMPLETING FORMS complete various forms Various forms such as deposit Reading instructions on a variety |e ICT tools
accurately and withdrawal slips, vetting, of forms e A variety of forms
bio data, indemnity, medical Completing various forms
aid and application forms.
DICTATION AND SPELLING spell dictated words Words, sentences and short Writing dictated words, sentences | e A variety of texts
passages. and passages. e Flash cards

Braille punctuation mark
sheet

Sentence strips

ICT tools

Spelling games

GRADE 7 TOPIC 1: LISTENING / OBSERVING

41



--- Page 42 ---
PHONICS

differentiate the 44 English e 44 English phonemes e differentiating various phonetic e various texts
phonemes -20 vowel sounds sounds e braille books
-24 consonant sounds. e listening to different texts e phoneme machine

distinguish different sounds |e words that have the same initial | e listing words with long and short e Multimedia resources

in a set of given words sound such as brain/braid, vowel sounds e THRASS chart

classify words according to picks/pigs e reading different sentences with e Rhyming games

initial sounds e words that have the same correct stress and intonation for

identify words with the same terminal sound such as fluency and meaning

terminal sounds stream/cream, dress/chess e identifying words with the same

identify rhyming words e rhyming words such as clay/play, terminal sounds

pronounce words with correct night/light e identifying diphthongs and

stress and intonation e long and short vowel sounds such triphthongs from a list of words

contrast words with long and as fill/feel, sit/seat, bit/beat e playing rhyming games

short vowel sounds e stress and intonation

articulate words with e diphthongs such as side, gate

diphthong and triphthong e _triphthongs such as quiet, choir

sounds
INTENSIVE LISTENING respond appropriately to an | Poems, rhymes, utterancesand |e Listening to utterances/observing e Songs

utterance instructions signs and responding appropriately |e Large print books

repeat utterances e Retelling stories heard e Recordings

recite heard poems, rhymes e Reciting poems and rhymes e ICT tools

and lyrics including those depicting aspects of |e Poems and rhymes

ask questions for clarity our tangible and intangible heritage | Audio content

e Reciting and singing words of songs
e Asking questions seeking
Clarification on content from other
learning areas

RESPONSES TO respond appropriately to e Responses using words such as | e Listening and responding to e Multimedia resources.
STATEMENTS and given statements surely, definitely, absolutely, statements appropriately e Work cards
QUESTIONS justify responses given agree e.g. it is cold today, | e Giving reasons for their responses

identify purpose, tone and agree/ strongly agree/disagree.

attitude of statements e Justification of responses given

e.g. Would you like to visit the
Great Zimbabwe Monuments?

- Response: Definitely, certainly,

42



--- Page 43 ---
absolutely!
- No; No | wouldn't

Dramatising stories.

- Justification
- | would like to learn more about
our heritage.
- | have been there before.
- Evaluation of statements
DICTATION AND SPELLING | e spell words e Words, sentences and passages. | e Listening and writing dictated words | e Flashcards
e write sentences and and sentences e Dictionary
passages correctly e Playing spelling games e Crossword puzzles
e A variety of texts
e ICT tools
LISTENING e retell stories read e Variety of texts e retelling stories e A variety of texts
COMPREHENSION e answer comprehension e Comprehension questions e Responding to comprehension e Question strips
questions questions e Resource persons

GRADE 7 TOPIC 2: SPEAKING / SIGNING

Applying registers in simulations of
real life situations

ARTICULATION pronounce or sign words e Fluency markers such as tone, e Discussing/signing topical issues e Sign language charts
correctly pauses, intonation, stress and e Conducting debates e Sign language
use appropriate gestures in pace e Reciting poems alphabet
speech e Communicative competencies e Presenting impromptu speeches on |e Multimedia tools
such as non-verbal and socio- topical issue using appropriate e Word Cards
cultural features gestures
e
REGISTERS use appropriate register to e Appropriate register for e Demonstrating the appropriate ways |e Pictures
express themselves in communicative situations such as of expressing ideas in different e Comic books
different situations expressing empathy, communicative situations either e Magazine/ newspaper
congratulations. online or physical interactions articles

Multimedia resources

43



--- Page 44 ---
PUBLIC SPEAKING e express themselves e A variety of topics e Reciting poems e A variety of texts
confidently before an e Cross-cutting themes and topical |e Researching on topical issues. e Recordings
audience issues e Structuring content chronologically. | Resource persons
e research on topical issues e Displaying public speaking skills e Multimedia resources.
e structure content e Rehearsing for public speaking
e present prepared and
impromptu speeches
DEBATE e express themselves e A variety of topics e Outlining debate procedures e A variety of texts
confidently before an e Cross-cutting themes and topical |e Researching on topical issues such |e Resource persons
audience issues as erosion of the indigenous culture |e Recordings
e research on topical issues e Debating procedures e Discussing topical and other issues | e Multimedia resources.
e structure content e Debating skills such as confidence, | e Analysing views of other learners
e sustain discussions or clarity, coherence of ideas, eye e Holding debates and shows on
arguments on topical and contact, tone, gestures, strategic topical and other issues
other issues. competence and guiding notes e Engaging in school-based or cluster-
e Argument sustenance markers based debate seminars
such as:
- Therefore,
- Thus,
- Subsequently,
- Nevertheless,
- Apparently,
DESCRIPTIONS e describe processes, events, |e Descriptive words of processes, e Describing processes, events, e Pictures
scenes and places. events, scenes and places and scenes and places e Chart
e demonstrate processes. their comparatives and e Demonstrating processes such as e Multimedia resources
superlatives preparing indigenous fruit juice e.g e Recipe books
e Words depicting sequence such as baobab juice, weaving, pottery e Large print books
after, later, firstly, finally e Braille books
e Processes such as preparing
indigenous fruit juice e.g baobab
juice, weaving, pottery
SUMMARISING STORIES | e _ select main points from e A variety of texts e Retelling stories e Story books
stories and texts heard e Identifying main ideas e Resource persons
e paraphrase stories or texts e Organizing information logically e Folk stories
heard e Paraphrasing e Multimedia resources

44



--- Page 45 ---
GRADE 7 TOPIC 3: READING

INTENSIVE READING e read various texts for detail e Variety of texts e Reading a variety of texts for |e A variety of texts
e give contextual meanings of detail e Braille texts
words and phrases from texts or e Giving contextual meanings of | e Large print texts
passages words and phrases from texts |e Word cards
e analyse texts read or passages e Multimedia resources
e evaluate ideas from texts read e Compiling vocabulary
notebooks
e Analysing texts read
e Evaluating ideas from texts
read
e Commenting on read texts
EXTENSIVE READING e read a variety of texts forleisure |e A variety of texts e Reading a variety of texts e A variety of texts
e retell stories read silently e ICT tools
e Retelling stories read e Large print books
e Braille texts
e Dictionaries
SKIMMING AND SCANNING | e | skim for the gist of a text e Skimming and scanning skills | e Skimming through texts to get |e A variety of texts
e scan for specific information from |e A variety of texts the gist e Braille texts
the text e Different types of questions |e Scanning through texts for e Talking books
e answer oral comprehension such as specific information. e Large print texts
questions closed, open ended and e Answering oral comprehension | e {CT tools
multiple choice questions
READING FOR FLUENCY e read texts fluently within a e A variety of texts. e Reading a variety of texts. e A variety of texts
specified time e Fluent reading skills suchas |e Observing punctuation marks |e Charts
-read with expression intonation, stress, observe in a text e Braille texts
-observe punctuation marks when punctuation marks, word e Pronouncing words from a e Talking books
reading recognition, word attack and given text accurately e Large print texts

45



--- Page 46 ---
passages without regressing pronunciation e Expressing feelings when e ICT tools
read with stress and intonation e Hand shape, movement and reading through the use of
location when signing intonation and non-verbal cues
INSTRUCTIONS AND read instructions, warnings and e Warnings in the environment | e¢ Reading instructions, warnings | e Pictures
WARNINGS symbols in the environment. such as on containers, and symbols in the e Posters
explain the meanings of electronic devices. environment. e Multimedia resources
instructions, warnings and commodities e Explaining the meanings of e Local environment
symbols in the environment. e Instructions on containers instructions, warnings and
and packets of different symbols in the environment. e ICT tools
commodities
REFERENCING use referencing skills to find e Referencing skills e Finding information from e Reference sources such as
information from different sources various reference materials dictionaries, directories,
e Applying referencing skills in atlases, maps,
different situations such as encyclopedias, internet,
when looking up contacts in table of contents, indices
physical and online and glossary sections
phonebooks. e ICT tools
GRADE 7 TOPIC 4: WRITING / BRAILLING
PENMANSHIP (HANDWRITING) e write legibly following the e Letters of the alphabet e Shaping letters of the alphabet Alphabet chart

Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/
relevant braille contractions

Grade 3-7 Nelson Script/ Braille
alphabet and contractions

Demonstrating letter formation
Observing the Grade 3-7
Nelson script handwriting on
the charts

e Practising the Grade 3-7

Braille alphabet
Nelson script chart
Braille contraction
sheets

46



--- Page 47 ---
Nelson script/ modelling braille

Sign language

writing alphabet
PARTS OF SPEECH Identify parts of speech in a Parts of speech such as: verbs, Identifying parts of speech ina | e A variety of texts
given text nouns, pronouns, prepositions, given text e Charts
construct sentences using conjunctions, adverbs and Using parts of speech in e Word cards
parts of speech adjectives in context. (refer to context e ICT tools
section 8.0 of this syllabus) Writing correct sentences e Multimedia tools
using selected parts of
speech.
LETTER WRITING write/braille informal/friendly Formal and informal letters Writing informal / friendly and |e ICT tools
and formal/business letter of E-mail. formal/ business letters using |e Sample letters
the required length -components of an email. correct format. e Letter format charts
compose an email Responding to letters and
attach files on composed advertisements using
mail appropriate language
structures (registers)
Composing e-mails
Attaching files
COMPOSITION write controlled, guided and Structure of a composition: Outlining a composition e Sample poems
free compositions using Introduction, body framework e Sample compositions
correct language structures (developmental paragraphs) and Writing controlled/guided and |e Pictures
use appropriate language conclusion free compositions e ICT tools
structures to write poems, Paragraphing skills such as use Sequencing given pictures e Diaries
stories, reports, speeches, of topic sentences, developers and writing compositions e Magazines

dialogues and diaries

and terminators

Cohesive devices (words that
make a paragraph flow such as
at first, and later, then, finally)
Format and elements of:

- Poems

- Reports

- Speeches

- Dialogues

based on the pictures
Recording significant activities
in diaries

Composing poems on topical
issues and reading or reciting
them to others

Compiling school magazine
articles

Writing reports, dialogues and
speeches

47



--- Page 48 ---
COMPREHENSION read a variety of texts for Variety of texts Reading various texts e Avariety of texts
comprehension e Key words and phrases including those depicting e Charts
give contextual meaning of aspects of our tangible and e Braille books
words intangible heritage e Pictures
answer multiple choice Answering comprehension e Work cards
questions questions in complete and e Large print books
answer questions in correct sentences e Multimedia Tools
complete and correct Answering multiple choice
sentences questions
use new words in own Working out contextual
sentences meanings of words and using
them in own sentences
SUMMARY WRITING Identify main points e Variety of texts Reading a variety of texts e A variety of texts
summarise a variety of texts Identifying main ideas from e Samples of
texts read summaries
Making notes using the main |e Charts on punctuation
ideas from texts read marks
Sequencing of ideas e Notebooks
Providing titles for passages e Braille texts
Maintaining stipulated length |e Work cards
of the summary as given in e Word cards
words e Talking books
Writing summaries of short e Large print texts
stories and newspaper articles
in sequential order
LANGUAGE STRUCTURES use various language e Conjunctions, quantifiers, Identifying language structures | e A variety of texts
structures for effective intensifiers, question tags, Demonstrating how the e Sentence strips
communication neither...nor/either...or various language structures e Charts
e (Refer to section 8.0 of this are used in sentences e Work cards
syllabus) Writing sentences using the e Braille texts
language structures correctly | Word cards
e Multimedia resources
PUNCTUATION punctuate sentences and e Punctuation marks Punctuating given paragraphs | e Charts
paragraphs appropriately. - Full stop and sentences e A variety of texts

48



--- Page 49 ---
- Inverted commas
- Exclamation mark

Sentence strips
Braille books

- Hyphen Multimedia resources
- Capital letters
- Semi colon
- Colon
- Question mark
COMPLETING FORMS e complete various forms e Various forms such as deposit e Reading instructions on a ICT tools
accurately and withdrawal slips, vetting, bio variety of forms A variety of forms
data, indemnity, medical aid and | e Completing physical and
application forms. online forms.
DICTATION AND SPELLING e spell dictated/ signed words |e Words, sentences and short e Writing dictated words, A variety of texts
passages. sentences and passages. Flash cards
Braille punctuation
mark sheet
Sentence strips
ICT tools

Spelling games

8.0 | SUPPORTING LANGUAGE STRUCTURES

The following supporting language structures should be taught in the heritage-based Junior English course. Teachers are to select what is appropriate
for the level of their learners and bear in mind that the structures should be taught in context and spread across all the language skills. By the end of the
Junior course, learners should be able to effectively use, among others, the following language structures:

e Nouns: proper, common, compound and collective. Nouns may be masculine, feminine or neutral, countable or uncountable, singular or plural, concrete

or abstract.

e Pronouns: personal, impersonal, possessive, relative, demonstrative, reflexive

e Opposites /antonyms

49



--- Page 50 ---
e Synonyms
e Similes
Verb tenses: simple forms of the present, past, future
- continuous forms of the present, past, future and participles
Adverbs and adverbial clauses
Adjectives- with or without comparative and superlative forms
Prepositions
Conjunctions for example; and, so, but; subordinate conjunctions such as; because, although, though
Punctuation marks — full stop, capital letters, comma, question mark, exclamation mark, apostrophe
quotation marks, hyphen, semicolon and colon.
e Quantifiers, for example, little, a little, few, a few, less, many, much, more, enough, scarcely, hardly any, about, over, almost, nearly, all, both, least,
most
e = Intensifiers, for example, very, so...that..., extremely, too...to, absolutely, totally, strongly, definitely, abundantly
e Structures that show cause and effect for example, the rains came late, so the harvest was
poor, the harvest was poor (because / for/ since) the rains had come late.
e Question tags, for example, she is a competent teacher, isn’t she? He isn’t here today, is
he?
e Modals, for example, may, might, can, could, shall, should, must, ought to, will, would, is,
was
e Conditional clauses, for example, If | were Rutendo, | would have shown respect to my grandmother; If we work hard, we will succeed; Unless it rains,
all crops will wilt.
Direct and indirect (reported) speeches
The passive and the active voice e.g. The people were addressed by the Chief. The Chief addressed the people.
Word formation (suffixes and prefixes)
Unless/ in spite of/ despite the fact that

Neither...nor/either...or
e Abbreviations and acronyms

NOTE: This list of language structures is not exhaustive and the teacher is urged to draw examples from tangible and intangible heritage.

9.0 ASSESSMENT

50


--- Page 51 ---
English Language learning area at Junior level shall be assessed through School Based Continuous Assessment (SBCA) and Summative Assessment (SA).
These assessments shall be guided by the principles of inclusivity, practicability, authenticity, transparency, flexibility, validity and reliability. The principles are
crucial for creating a supportive and effective learning environment that fosters growth and development in learners at junior level. In addition to SBCA and SA,
those aspects that cannot be assessed through the continuous and summative modes will be assessed through learner profiling. The aspects to be profiled will
include soft skills among others. The macro language skills which are Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing as well as their sub-skills will be assessed.
Arrangements, accommodations and modifications must be visible to enable candidates with special needs to access assessments. This section covers the
assessment objectives, the assessment model, the scheme of assessment, and the specifications for SBCA.

9.1 Assessment Objectives
Learners will be assessed on their ability to:

respond appropriately to statements and questions

retell/sign various utterances heard

use appropriate registers in specific language functions

describe people, objects, places, scenes, processes and events

read a variety of texts fluently for comprehension and leisure

analyse information read and make inferences

write coherent and well organised sentences, summaries and creative work.

NOaPwn>

9.2 Assessment Model

The assessment will follow both Continuous and Summative assessment. Continuous Assessment will include recorded activities from the School Based
Project and other activities done by the learners for assessment while summative will include terminal examinations; end of week, month, term, and year or
check-points assessments.

51


--- Page 52 ---
52


--- Page 53 ---
ASSESSMENT MODEL AT JUNIOR LEVEL

ASSESSMENT OF LEARNER
PERFORMANCE IN ENGLISH

~

SCHOOL BASED
SUMMATIVE
NTIN ASSE
(0) vous ass SSMENT RGSS MIEN
i" . 80%
SCHOOL BASED
PROJECT Paper 1 Paper 2
PROFILING ° ag ) (Paper 2)
20% Multiple Choice STRUCTURED
N | ™ Questions (MCQ) PAPER
N 50% -_ 30%
EXIT
PROFILE CA MARK (20%)
. CERTIFICATE J SA MARK (80%)

FINAL MARK (CA
MARK + SA MARK
. = 100%)

53


--- Page 54 ---
9.3 Scheme of Assessment

Learners at Junior level will be assessed using both School Based Continuous Assessment and Summative Assessment. From grade 3 to 7, learners will do a
school-based project per grade, per year and per learning area which will contribute 20% to the end of term and year mark. Public examination candidates at
Junior level are expected to complete 2 school-based projects per learning area at grade 6 and grade 7 level, which will contribute 20% to the final mark at Grade
7.

FORM OFASSESSMENT WEIGHTING
School Based Continuous Assessment 20%
Summative Assessment 80%

Total 100%

9.3: School - Based Project: Continuous Assessment Scheme

54


--- Page 55 ---
Project Stage Completion Marks Project Mark Weight
Date (Year 1) by end of
each stated month below:
Project Execution
Stages from Grade 3-6
| Problem Identification and its January-February 5
context
2 Possible methods of solving the | February-March 10
problem
3 Selecting the most suitable March-April 5
method
4 Development of Ideas May-July 15
5 Presentation of Results July-September 10
6 Evaluation and October 5
Recommendations
TOTAL 50 10%
Project Two at Grade 7 (Year 2)
| Problem Identification and its January-February 5
context
2 Possible methods of solving the | February-March 10
problem
3 Selecting the most suitable March-April 5
method
4 Development of Ideas May-June 15
) Presentation of Results June-July 10
6 Evaluation and July-September 5
Recommendations
Total 50 10%
Grand Total 100 20 %

9,4 SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT (80%)

Skills weighting chart

Reading

30%

Writing

50%

55


--- Page 56 ---
Forty multiple choice 40 Thr 30minutes 50%
questions
Section A guided 20 Thr 45 minutes 30%
composition
Section B- Comprehension
and Summary:

i. | Comprehension

ii. © Summary 10

5

9.4 DESCRIPTION OF THE SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT STRUCTURE

The Summative assessment comprises two components as follows:
Paper 1. (40 marks) 50%
Thr 30 minutes

There are 40 multiple choice questions based on register, comprehension, language usage and structure. Candidates are required to
answer all questions.

Paper 2. (35 marks) 30%
Thr 45minutes

Paper 2 comprises sections A and B. Section A comprises 3 guided compositions and candidates are required to choose one. This section
carries 20 marks. The candidate must answer any one of the questions in words between 80 and 120.Section B is a comprehension and
summary section carrying 15 marks. The candidate must answer all the 10 comprehension questions with a possible total of 10 marks. The
candidate must also write a summary of not more than 50 words scoring a possible total of 5 marks.

9.6 skiLLs WEIGHTING GRID

Application
|

9.6.1 Specification grid
56


--- Page 57 ---
Paper 1

Topic Skill 1 Skill 2 Skill 3 Total
Comprehension 11 6 4 21
Language structures 8 5 3 16
Punctuation | | | 3
Total 20 12 8 40
Paper 2

Topic Skill 1 Skill 2 Skill 3 Total
Section A

Creative writing 9 6 5 20
Section B

Comprehension 5 3 2 10
Summary 4 | 0 5
Total 18 10 7 35

9.7 ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENTS/TOOLS:
The following are suggested tools

Check list

Observation schedules
Tests

Rating Scale
Exercises

Practical activities

School based project

57



--- Page 58 ---
58


