--- Page 1 ---
r—— Ee —

BA college press

| Ventures Primary
~~ Family, Religion and
"Moral Education

THEREEAG
Sold

S. Chin'anga

New Curriculum



--- Page 2 ---
CIID

Topic 1 Family...

Unit 1

Unit 2

Unit 3

Unit 4

Concept of family...

Family origin... .

Family types and relationships.
Lineages and totems...

Family and religion... is

Family life and marriages in religion...
Family and community...

Family roles in the commurity..... S405 6408 00s penne RR LR SALA ARNIS AIRES SROES AS SARS

Family interaction..
Caring for the needy...

Social and emotional i earning.

Social awareness..
Respect for others... cers
Empathy and appreciation for diversity...

End of term one assessment...

Topic 2 Religion...

Unit §

Unit 6

Unit 7

Unit 8

Concept of religion. aoe EE bE He 0b 0 4S SHOR Saas bi bed se SS Ness su ERBEB EB bO RRR
Religion in the a CH bet en nea rtaessunans ae ge ss see sie SHS GORER HOSOI SUS HSE

Indigenous religion...
National ancestors..

Religious ceremonies/festivals ir in \ families. ae NE USES Rees sovreseied

Roles of lineages and totems..
Artefacts and attire..............

Religious Practitioners. ......ccvev ieee

Key teachings...

Indigenous Religion and the environment............... SARs Se ap aR Seman anes

Christianity...
Jesus Christ's life and ministry...
Religious ceremonies /festivdls...

Religious artefacts and attire... eee teeiererenes teeeeeererereeeeeerearaeeeaans
Religious PraCHHiONErS. .....c.iiiieiie eee reece

Key teachings...

Christianity o and the environment...
Food laws...

Judaism..

Historical background...
Ceremonies/festivals...

Artefacts and attire......... Ee — A



--- Page 3 ---
Religious practitioners......... ..63
Key teachings... es ..63
Judaism and the environment. CUCU OSU.
FOO 1aWS IN JUAQISM....uveiiiee cece eee 65
Unit9 Islam.. ..69
Historical background... ..69
Key teachings... i. ..70
Ceremonies and festivals... 72
Artefacts and attire..... ean 74
Religious practitioners.................. ..75
Islam and the environment........ ..76
Food laws.. . 77
End of term two assessment... we. 79
Topic 3 Morals and values.............. ..84
Unit 10 Concept of morals and values.. ...85
Right and wrong.. ...85
Right to belong fo ¢ a 1 religion... 87
Rights and responsibilities in faimess... ....88
Children’s rights... 89
Unit 11 Conflict and conflict management... 93
Conflict at school and community... ere ———— 93
Conflict management at school and community... ceva 95
Unit 12 National value systems... ..98
Responsibility and integrity... UPPER - |
Unit 13 Religion on technology and enterprise... ee ——————— 102
Religious artefacts and enterprise... . ..102
Technology and values... ...104
Topic 4 Religion and health.. ..107
Unit 14 Sexual abuse.. ...108
Forms of sexual abuse and perpetrators... ...108
Unit 15 Religion and gender... 113
Gender equality.............. Seeseanens 113
Unit 16 Religion and sexuality.................. 116
Boy and girl relationships.......... cedserransniin 116
Unit 17 Religion, HIV and AIDS..........oovvvveeeeeii 118
Effects of HIV and AIDS.............. 118
Solutions to HIV and AIDS.........c............ 119
Awareness on HIV and AIDS..............oouuvmmiieeeeee eee 120
Unit 18 Healthy lIVING......ooooiiiii eee 124
Personal hygiene........... oe . ..124
Health habits... . .. e618 04 004 44483004 a0 mss 2nasassansesesres ..126
End of year assessment.............ooooeuueeeieenieeeeeeeeee eee a ..130


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction
The family is one of the most respected units in societies and communities. The family
is a sound social group where individuals are taught good values, attitudes and
even skills for life. Families provide support and protection to their members. They
are the source of one's identity and history. The types of families have continuously
changed but the importance of the family in society has remained the same.
The roles and practices of families have helped to maintain order and peace in
the society. When people started to live together in groups, some took on the
leadership roles. They became chiefs and kings and their families led people for
years. Up to now there are lineages and chieftainship practices.



--- Page 5 ---
Unit I: Concept of family

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
. state the origins of families
. state types of families
. list members in families
. describe relationships within families
. define lineages
. identify own totems
. recite own totem.

Background

There are various explanations of how the family started. Most religions believe God/
Allah/Mwari/UNkulunkulu made the earth and everything in it. The first humans to
be created became the first family and these gave rise to many nations in the
world. Present day families trace their origins back to the first humans created by
the Supreme Being. Families have been accepted as the source of peaceful and
progressive societies.

Key words

chieftainship origin Supreme Being
lineage

1A. Family origin

Grandmother Moyo Grandfather Moyo Grandfather Tembo Grandmother Tembo

Nelson Moyo Tambire Tembo
(Father)

Samantha Nduduzo Taurai

A family tree



--- Page 6 ---
Sams

Most societies acknowledge their origin and existence to a Supreme Being. An
origin is a place where something begins or arises. Supreme Being is a name for
God. Societies across the globe are made up of families. The Supreme Being is
believed to oversee and lead families in most societies. Families trace their origins
through family trees. This is as shown by the family tree on the previous page.

Activity 1

1. Tell the class your family history.
2. Draw your family free up to your grandparents (three generations).

Exercise 1

. What is an origin?

. To whom do all families trace their origin back to?
. Supreme being is a name for

. The Supreme Being is believed to

. What is a family tree?

1B. Family types and relationships

The nuclear family

This type of family is made up of a mother,
father and their children. However, in
indigenous culture, polygamy is considered
a nuclear family as the children are
the father's. The size of the family is not
important in Indigenous Religion as long
as all the children share the same surname
and are of one man. The picture shows a
nuclear family that has gone out for pizza.

Child headed family

When parents die and leave children
staying on their own, with the eldest child
below the age of 18 years leading the
younger brothers and sisters, they become Nuclear family at dinner

a child headed family. The eldest takes

care of the younger siblings especially if they don't have relatives nearby. The
children have to look after each other, feed themselves and cover other needs
as there won't be a father or mother to provide, guide and take care of them.



--- Page 7 ---
Life in a child headed household can be very
difficult if the parents don't leave material
resources for their children. The eldest is
mostly disturbed as he/she has to ensure that
each of the younger siblings is well cared for.
One of the difficulties is that the eldest usually
drops out of school to take the parental roles
and ensure that they have food and other
requirements. The picture shows aq child
headed family

One parent

A family in which the children stay with either
the father or the mother only is called a one
parent family. This family comes as a result of
the death of one parent, parents divorcing,
separating or the parent may just decide not
to get into marriage and raise the children on
their own. The one parent family used to be
rare long ago but now it is quite common. The
picture shows a one parent family.

One parent family

Activity 2

1. Identify the types of families found in your community.
2. Describe each of the following family types:

a) Nuclear family.

b) Child headed family.

c) Single parent family.
3. Write a poem about your family.

Exercise 2

. What is a child-headed family?
. List two other family types.

. State two things that may lead to a one parent family.

Who plays the parental role in a child headed family?

. Which family type is made up of a mother, father and children?

. What are the differences between a child headed and one parent family?

CA WN —



--- Page 8 ---
1C. Lineages and totems

Lineages

Individuals can trace their lineages starting with their parents. They then establish
their grandparents then go on to their great grandparents according to their
generations until they get to the ancestors. Lineage is a direct descent from an
ancestor or ancestry.

An example of a family lineage is as follows:

Rudo Nhumwa of the Nzou totem, a Grade 5 learner at Rupiri Primary School, traces
her birth to the Chitsama family. John is her father and Marifana her grandfather
who descended from Marufu of the Nerupiri chieftainship. A chieftainship refers
to a family that leads a group, especially a clan or tribe. Lineages can be traced
using a family free. See the family free on page 2.

Totems

Totems are very important in African tradition.
They can help show people their relatives and
origins. A totem is a sacred object, animal or
symbol that serves as an emblem of a group
of people, such as a family, clan, lineage or
tribe. In the example above, Rudo is said to be
of the Nzou totem which is an elephant. Other
people who share the same totem are the
Ndlovu people. There are many different totem
animals for the different people in Zimbabwe.

For example, the Ncube people have the Soko Lion (Shumba/Sibanda totem)
totem which is a monkey. Whereas, the Sibanda and Shumba'’s totem animal is
the Lion. The picture shows the Sibanda totem, a lion.

Activity 3

Do the following activities: / "HG
1. State your lineage to as far back as you can recall. i IQ

2. Write your totem praise poem. - =
3. Identify those with similar totems and praise poems as yous: 4:

Exercise 3

What is a lineage?
Define a clan.
What benefits does one get from knowing his/her lineage?
What is a totem?

Identify any benefits of knowing one's totem. Give two answers.
Why are people of the same totem discouraged to marry?

oh



--- Page 9 ---
Summary

Families trace their origins to the Supreme Being.

There are three main types of families and these include the nuclear family,
child headed family and single or one parent family.

Names and totems serve to strengthen relationships and cooperation among
family members.

Lineages help families to trace their historical background.

People of Zimbabwe and other African countries used to stay in ethnic groups.

Glossary

Community - q group of people living in the same place.

Ethnic — referring to a shared identity by a group through culture,
heritage, history and language.

Oversee — be responsible for the Management or arrangement of an
activity.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Families trace their origins to .

A. the father B. the church
C. religion D. the Supreme Being
2. The ___ leads qa child headed family.
A. infant B. mother C. eldest D. father
3. The other name for the Supreme Being isthe |
A. Creator B. Totem C. Heaven D. Ancestor
4. In a one parent family the children are taken care of by
A. uncle B. sibling C. stepfather D. the parent
5. Your father's father is your
*A. uncle B. stepfather c. grandfather p. sibling
6. Your mother's sister is your
A. niece B. aunt C. nephew D. cousin
7. Uncles and aunts are siblings to your
A. sisters B. brothers C. parents D. grandparents
8. Families that share the same heritage, culture ang language are an _
A. extended family B. blended family

C. ethnic group D. cultural group



--- Page 10 ---
ONO WON~

. Some local families use as their surnames.

A. forenames B. totems
C. religious names D. siblings

. Families stay connected for the much needed .

A. support and protection B. resources
C. culture D. ancestors

Structured questions

Draw your family free as far back as you remember.

What is a nuclear family?

Define lineage.

What is a totem?

State any two family types.

Give three reasons why we have child headed families.
Give two reasons for the existence of single parent families.
Why is polygamy a nuclear family in Indigenous Religion?



--- Page 11 ---
Unit 2 Family and religion

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. state ways of marrying in religion.

Background

Families in Zimbabwe belong to different religions. The constitution of Zimbabwe
allows these religions to practice marriage according to their cultural and religious
beliefs. Indigenous groups perform various marriage ceremonies. Indigenous
means originating or occuring in a particular place or being a native of a particular
place. Ceremonies are formal religious or public occasions. Over the years there
have been intermarriages between members of families from different ethnic
groups. Intermarriage is marriage between people of different tribes, races or
religions.

Key words
indigenous ceremonies  infermarriages

2A. Family life and marriages in religion

All religions see the family as of great importance in safeguarding the values
and practices of society and contributing to peace. The family grows through
marriage and ensures continuity to the next generation. It also serves as a source
of society's stability and peacefulness. In addition, the family safeguards and
respects society's values and practices. When it comes to marriage in Indigenous
Religion, it allows for such ways as: kuganha, musengabere, kukumbira/ukucela
umlilo and kutizira.

A.Kuganha - This is when a young lady proposes marriage to a young man
who then refuses to marry her. She then forces herself on him by
going to the young man's homestead, sometimes with her aunt.
They sit were people can see them and wait to be addressed
by the family. After they are seen at the homestead, the young
man’s family calls for a meeting to find out who the girl wants
fo marry and convince the young man. In Indigenous Religion,
when a young lady offers herself for marriage it is considered
a blessing from the ancestors. Therefore, the young man's
family would accept her as his wife and then start marriage
proceedings with her family.



--- Page 12 ---
B. Kutizira

lbwe
gious
nous
tular
here
hnic
3S or

In the Shona culture this is when a young lady falls pregnant
and elopes to the young man's homestead at night. However,
the lady can also elope even without falling pregnant. After
seeing her, the young man's family then informs the girl's family
that their daughter is with them. In Shona this process is called
tsvagirai kuno. A representative is then sent to the girl's family
and lobola negotiations begin soon afterwards.

The Kalanga also have a practice similar to the Shona culture.
However, in the Kalanga culture, the girl and boy agree that
the girl should elope and, together, they inform the girl's aunt.
The young man gives the girl a token to leave under her pillow
for her parents to find. The girl elopes at night and is met by the
young man. They then go to the young man’s homestead. In the
morning, when the girl's parents start to look for her and cannot
find her, they then look underneath her pillow. Once they find a
token they then know that the girl has eloped. Like in the Shona
custom, the young man’s family also sends representatives to
let the girl's family know that the girl is with them. The lobola
process then starts.

C. Musengabere - This is when a young man sees the girl he wants to marry then

ues
ugh
rce
ind
o]UN
ela

carries her to his homestead without her approval. At the young
man’s homestead the girl is convinced to marry the young
man and finally accepts. The young man's family then sends a
representative to the girl's family and lobola negotiations begin.

D. Kukumbira/Ukucela umililo — This is when a young man’s family goes to the girl's

family to ask for her hand in marriage. Marriage proceedings



--- Page 13 ---
then start once the girl's family agrees. After everything has
been fulfilled, including lobola payment, the girl's family then
accompany her to the young man's homestead.

In other religions, like Christianity, a white wedding comes after the kukumbira/
ukucela umlilo marriage ceremony so as to present the couple before God and the

marrying couples do their cultural and religious rituals. Both religious rituals involve
them standing before the congregants and before Allah or God. Muslims practise
arranged marriages. They believe that the families marry, not the individuals. The
bride price is decided by the families and the man should pay bride price before

In Judaism, followers believe that marriage is a direct instruction from God. To start
the process, a contract or agreement is made between the two people who wish
to get married before their loved ones. Sometimes the mothers break a plate to
seal the engagement. After all the different rituals, they are then joined together
before God, relatives and friends.

Activity 1

1. In groups, choose one indigenous way of marrying and do a role play.

2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of any two of the marriage
ways.

3. Discuss about Christian marriages, each giving an example of how it is done
in their denomination.

Exercise 1

State two indigenous ways of getting married.
The process of marrying by paying lobola before getting the bride is called
Marriage helps the family to grow to the next _

Who breaks the plate during an engagement in Judaism?

Who joins together the bride and groom in a Christian marriage?

Who uses the bride price in a marriage in Islam?

Which religion practices arranged marriages?

In Judaism, marriage is a direct instruction from whom?

N

PN Aw



--- Page 14 ---
| has
then

bira/
ithe
way
way
The
Dive
tise
The

fore

bne

tart
ish
fo
her

p

Project 1

In groups, make wedding charts showing marriages in Christianity, Islam and
Judaism (you can use cuttings, photographs, drawings or paper mash).

Summary

* Indigenous groups have different marriage ways.

* There are some similarities in marriage practices among some religions
like payment of bride price, ceremonies for accepting brides and celebrating
marriages.

* Islam practices arranged marriages.

* Judaism believes marriage is approved by God.

Glossary

Bride price — goods or money paid for a bride, also called lobola.
Engagement - an open agreement to get married.
Wedding — a ceremony where two people are united in marriage.

it asses

End of un sment test

es Ee —

Multiple choice questions

1. All of the following are indigenous ways of getting married except .

A. forceful following B. working as payment for a bride
C. forcing a young man to marry D. wedding bells
2. Religious groups respect the ____ as a basis for a peaceful society.
A. family B. wedding C. bride price D. possessions
3. What comes after lobola in Christianity?
A. Children B. Wedding C. Party D. People
4. In a marriage engagement in Judaism, who breaks the plates to seal the
promise?

A. Father of the Bride.
B. Mother of the bride.
C. Mothers of the bride and the groom.
D. Aunts of the bride and the groom.
5. Which religion practices arranged marriages?

A. Islam B. Indigenous C. Christianity D. Judaism
6. Who joins the bride and the groom in a Christian marriage?
A. A go-between. B. The elders.

C. Marriage officer/Pastor/Priest. D. Relatives.



--- Page 15 ---
a

In most societies, which family pays the bride price?
A. The groom's family. B. The bride's family.

C. The aunts’ family. D. The uncles’ family.

— brings the bride and the groom's families together for marriage
negotiations”.

A. Priest B. Pastor

C. A go-between D. Marriage officer

A marriage will grow the family to the next generation if it bears |

A. bride price B. mariage rings

C. children D. possessions

Structured questions

Write down any three indigenous ways of marrying.
State similarities between Christian and indigenous marriages.
Who arranges marriages in Islam?

Who directs marriages in Judaism?

What unites and builds relationships between families?



--- Page 16 ---
Imiage

Unit 3 Family and community

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. identify family roles in the community

2. explain why it is important to have family roles in the community
3. explain how families interact with each other

4. state ways of caring for the needy in the community.

Background

Families are the foundation of the community. It is the first stage where children
are taught language, values, work, unity and expected behaviour. Families unite
in times of happiness and need, helping each other for life to become easy in
the community. The community spirit of oneness made communities come up
with several ways to help each other in doing work. During difficult times of illness
and death and in looking after the needy. The family and community roles are
common in all types of settlements found in Zimbabwe.

(3 Key words
py 4 interdependence caring emotional support

3A. Family roles in the community

Being a community means living and sharing resources with a lot of people from
different families. Read the story that follows. _

Tongai’'s community

Tongai lives in a resettlement area where
they don't have, a school, a dip tank for
their cattle, a borehole and a connecting
road to the nearest service centre. As a
community they have come up with ways
of making their lives better. They have
divided themselves into four groups. The
first group is helping in the construction
of a school, the second group is busy
constructing a dip tank with the help of
a veterinary officer. A worker from the i
District Development Fund is helping in “am Qa vs

the construction of a road to the service Colors % 3 a, ~®
cenfer with the third group. A borehole Community members working together to

build classrooms



--- Page 17 ---
Families in Communities also attend (e200
funerals, weddings and other ceremonies
and festivals. When there is a death in
the community, families help provide
services like cooking at the gathering.
They also attend  burigl services to
help the bereaved ang comfort them
during the sad time. The picture shows gq

Community members have attended
to support, comfort and help the family
through their time of loss.

Which other services

mentioned in the story?
2. What other events can stop Community work?
3. Why is each of the projects important?

4. Which other community settlement types do you fing around Zimbabwe?
Discuss.

are needed in g community other than those

Exercise 1

Where does Tongai live?

What was the first group doing?
Why did all the groups stop working?
Name two services that were lacking in the community?
How does gq road serve the community?
Who provides labour for Community projects?

PNA WN —

2825 0 0


--- Page 18 ---
is?

3B. Family interaction

Working together

Maidei's family do not have cattle of their own for ploughing during the rainy
season. For them to be able to till their land they usually brew some beer and call
their neighbours who have cattle to come and help plough their fields. Members
of the community provide this service in the spirit of helping and Unhu/Ubuntu/

Vumunhu for the value of beer and the work done are no match. This indigenous
practice is called ilima/mageja/humwe/nhimbe/majangano. This is a way to
ensure food security for all households and to maintain peace as no one will be
fempted to steal food from others. Communities help in many other areas such
as weeding, harvesting and threshing of grains. At all these cooperative activities,
they prepare food and eat together while at work. The beverage is used as a
medium of drawing people together.

Community members at a nhimbe/ilima

Child minding

In the traditional systems, the community did not allow children to stay on their
own, they were taken into the extended families so that they could grow among
those of their family and according to their practices and teachings. However, with
changing times and growth of towns, disintergation of the family unit has brought
many other problems such as, abandoned children and unavailability of family to


--- Page 19 ---
help take care of them.
With the new set up,
the communities had to
adjust and this brought
about leaving children
with friends or trusted
neighbours or at daycare
centres. However, in the
olden days when families
lived closer to each other
they helped mind each
other's children. Children
would grow up around
cousins, uncles, aunts
and grandparents.

Emotional support

Mother leaving her child with a trusted neighbour

Emotional support is the

In groups, discuss the importance of emotional support to victims.
“Child minding is a dangerous practice.” In groups of 10, debate this ideq.
Others should be for the idea and others against it.

Exercise 2

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
é.
7.
8.

What is child minding?

Why is a school necessary in the community?

Who ensures that there is peace in communities?

Why do community people gather at funerals?

What is the reason for community cooperatives?

State two roles community members can do at any celebration?
What facilities do families in a community share?

What situations can cause emotional stress?



--- Page 20 ---
or she

require
D assist
easant
death,

by ee
ty play

3C. Caring for the needy

Caring means displaying kindness and concern for others. Communities have
disadvantaged people that include the sick, the elderly, the poor and the
disabled. Communities are expected to provide emotional and material support
to such groups. Read the story about Thabani's mother and how they are taking
care of her at home.

Thabani helping to feed his sick mother

Thabani's mother is sick. She cannot work or cook for them as the flue has her lying
in bed all day. Thabani and his sister help her with food and water. They try to take
care of her while their father is at work. Thabani's mother wants to get well soon so
that she can take care of her children but the sickness is affecting her. The other
day the father took their mother to the doctor to get her checked up. The doctor
prescribed medication for her. They could not admit her as they didn't have any
free beds due to the accident that had happened that night. Two buses collided
on the Bulawayo-Harare highway near their Kwekwe town. The hospital was busy
treating injured people from the bus. Thabani's father, Mr Moyo had to take her
home and take care of her there.

This is what we call home-based care.

Activity 3 |
1 Research on the life of needy people in the community.

2 How are the needy disadvantaged?
3. How can you help the needy as individuals and as a community?



--- Page 21 ---
Exercise 3
How did Thabani help his sick mother?

. When one is sick where does he/she go?

. What caused the hospital to be full?

. What is home based care?

. How can you help the sick?

_ What should children do for their parents when they grow old and can no
longer look after themselves?
How can the community help those who are bed ridden?

Summary

« Families share responsibilities and roles in projects that make them get services
as a community.

« For a community to live together smoothly there is need for its members to
assist each other by providing labour, material and emotional support.

« Communities are expected to care for their elderly, disabled, poor and
disadvantaged.

Glossary

Desperate a situation where a person has little or no way of helping
himself/herself out of it.

Homeless having no home to stay.

Humility being humble and showing respect.

Needy the people in the community who cannot provide for
themselves.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. What are communities expected to provide to the poor?
A. Emotional and material support.
B. Music and dance.
C. Wealth and property.

| D. Labour and skills.

2. Who was expected to stay with the children in the indigenous system?
A. Community. B. Teachers.
C. Extended family members. D. Friends.



--- Page 22 ---
- In a good community, families help each other by providing all of the
following

except.

A. labour B. emotional support

C. moral support D. stealing

. What services are provided by the elderly during community projects?

A. Labour. B. Money.

C. Care for the children. D. Care for the beer.

- In attending funerals, communities give each other ____ support.

A. emotional B. biological C. physical D. mortal

. More elderly people now stay in old people's homes because of the break
down of

A. family support systems B. the economy

C. friendship D. energy

. Who needs home based care?

A. The disabled/handicapped. B. The elderly.

C. Children. D. The sick and bed ridden.
. Communities now share roles in projects to make work ____.

A. difficult B. expensive C. easy D. small

. Which of these do not have homes?

A. Elderly. B. Disabled. C. Children. D. Street kids.
. One shows when he/she helps the needy in the community.
A. pride B. wealth C. kindness D. poverty

Structured questions

. What is a community?

. Which activities can be done by a community?

. List two acts of kindness one can do for the disadvantaged in the
community.

. State any two community projects that show cooperation.

qQ) b

. State at least two roles the community can perform at each of the
following:

a) Funeral

b) Wedding celebration

c) Child naming ceremony

d) Construction of a school



--- Page 23 ---
Unit4 Social and emotional learning ook 4
ree

ple 4 g

Objectives There

By the end of the unit you should be able to: his dg
. identify neighbours hm
explain the importance of socialisation within the communities fhe

explain ways of showing respect
. state the merits of showing respect for others
. identify the diversity in human beings

justify the need to appreciate diversity.

UTA WN —

Background |

Communities and societies develop well if their People have the right social skills
and are able to maintain sound relations among themselves. Different situations in

3 8

|

Key words |
socialisation respect appreciate

if 4

4A. Social awareness |
Philani helps find his neighbour's daughter

“Tsakanil Tsakani! Tsakanil” Philani could Na
hear Mr Matsilele calling for his daughter.
He waited to hear Tsakani respond but [FT
silence followed. This told him that Mr —
Matsilele couldn't find her. Mr Matsilele
was his neighbour. He lived in the house
next door When Philani and his family
moved into the neighbourhood, Mr
Matsilele was the first neighbour who
came to their house to welcome them.
When Philani heard him looking for
Tsakani he rushed to him to ask if he could
help. Tsakani used to play with Philani's
young sister,  Nomakhosi. “Tsakanil
Tsakani! Tsakanil” they called out for her
in unison. They then agreed to go around
the neighbourhood and look her. Philani

3

441411

Fe an

> " i fi | |
. E = . ’ oS
. x. £5. ThE Ad

Mr Matsilele and Philani looking for Tsakani

SAMNANT<SCPIYTS



--- Page 24 ---
ial skills
ffions in
cted to
juctive

fferent

took one corner whilst Mr Matsilele took the other. As they called out and asked
people about Tsakani, Philani spotted someone like her standing underneath a
free close to the main road. “Mr Matsilele,” Philani called. “I have found Tsakani.
There she is under that tree. She looks hurt.” Mr Matsilele came running and took
his daughter in his arms and carried her. He gave Philani a big smile and thanked
him for helping. After the incident, Mr Matsilele and Philani’s parents met again at
the school fundraising function where they played games and danced to help
fundraise money for the new school building block. Most of the parents from the
neighbourhood were also there. Mr Matsilele thanked Philani's parents for the help
in looking for his daughter and told them they were raising a good hearted young
man who was going to grow up to be a jewel in the community.

Activity 1

Philani identified Mr Matsilele by his voice. He also identified Tsakani because he
knew how she looked like as she was his little sister's friend and also his neighbour.

In groups:

1. Talk about your neighbours.

2. Describe features that would help you identify them in public.

3. If you get lost and your neighbour passes by, would you be able to identify
them? If yes, then how? If no, then why?

Importance of socialisation within communities

Socialisation is a process that makes individuals learn values, beliefs and norms of a
society. This process starts from the home. Communities also play an important role
in the socialisation of children. Through community group activities like community
gardening, nhimbe/ilima, celebrations and funerals, you learn the importance of
oneness. You may not go for funerals but you learn the importance of working
together from seeing adults going. Socialisation within communities can produce
members who are either responsible or iresponsible. The way adults relate and work
together within the communities works as an example for the young ones. If the
community is divided, children will learn that and carry it over to their children. Your
life and standard of living can be influenced by the community you grow up in.

Exercise 1

. Who was looking for his daughter?

. How did Philani identify Mr Matsilele?

. Mr Matsilele’'s daughter's names ___.

. When your neighbour is in need what should you do?

. Who lives next door to Philani?

. What do we call someone who lives either next door or in the same
neighbourhood as us?

. Give one reason why socialisation is important within communities.

. Itisgoodto____ together as a community.



--- Page 25 ---
4B. Respect for others

There are a lot of ways of showing respect for others. Respect is a feeling of regar¢
for the feelings, wishes or rights of others. Some of the ways are taught at hom
when growing up and others at school. At home, siblings are taught not to figh
with each other and to share things equally. At school learners are taught nc
to bully each other, engage in fights and treat each other bad. Learners why
respect each other do not steal or poke each other. They do not laugh at thos
who fail but help them to succeed. Respect is not only when someone answel
the other politely, it is also helping those who fall instead of laughing at ther
Learners are also taught to greet elders politely and not fo be rude to them. Gir
and women genuflex or kneel when serving food. Men and boys squat whe
greeting the elderly. When you show respect to others you gain their respect back
The Christian golden rule, “Do unto others as you would like them to do unto you
shows that when you respect other people and treat them well then they will als
respect you.

. In groups, come up with a list of things that show respect and the benefits of
showing respect to others. Present findings in class.
Role play two scenes, one should show disrespect and the other respect.

What is respect?
Learners can show respect by not ____ up others.

Do unto others as youwould ____todounto____.

Women and girls ____or____ to show respect.

The way one responds to another person's question shows ____.
When you show respect to others you ____.

Give one advantage of showing respect.

At school, learners are taught notto ___.

PNG hWN =

4C. Empathy and appreciation for diversity

Human beings are different in a number of ways that include culture, belief
religion and race. In a community, you find Muslims, Christians, Jews and thos
who believe in Indigenous Religion living together in harmony. This is a sign thc
they are tolerant and they appreciate their differences. To appreciate is th
recognition and enjoyment of the good qualities of someone or something, itis als
full understanding of something or someone. Communities work together to buil
schools, clinics, orphanages and form neighbourhood watch groups betwee
themselves regardless of their differences. It is important for you to understand thc
people are born different, they believe in different things and yet they can liv


--- Page 26 ---
| of regard
t at home
ot to fight
aught not
mers who
n at those
B answers
at them.
hem. Girls
vat when|
ect back.
plo you"!
y will also!

| together in harmony and still work together without discrimination. The pictures
show different people in the community. Talk about their differences and how

they should treat each other.

Activity 3

1. In groups:
a) State differences in people.
b) Discuss the importance of tolerance.

2. Dramatise scenes that show appreciation for diversity in communities.

Different people in the community

|

enefits of

spect.

Exercise 3

. People should live togetherin ____.
. State any three reasons why community members should help each other?
. Living together in harmony and not minding our differencesis __.
. State the mentioned common activities that a community can work on
together.
. A community can be made up of different religions such as ___.
6. What is appreciation?

L. beliefs,

nd those

sign that | Summary

te is the | °* A caring society teaches its young people the correct values, attitudes and skills.
5 itis also + People should be treated the same way even when they look or seem different.
to build * Neighbours are expected to protect and help each other.

yetween » Tolerance helps to promote a peaceful community.

ond that » People in communities should respect practices and religions that are different

can live from theirs.
* Marriages help to unite people of different cultures and religions.



--- Page 27 ---
‘Glossary

Discrimination — the unjust treatment of different categories of people.
Diversity ~— 4arange of different things.

Empathy — the ability to understand and share the feelings of another.
Genuflex —~ to bend a knee.

igenous Communities?
A. Son-in-aw. B. Grandmothers.

C. Elders. D. No one
2. Good neighbours help and — each other.

A. neglect B. protect C. fight D. cheat

to their parents
and communities,

A. worship B. support C. forget D. no attention
4. People greet each other as g signof ____
A. hate B. empathy C. support D. respect
5. Marriages between People from different Cultures and religions help to
communities.
A. unite B. break Cc. destroy D. curse

6. People with different cultures or religions should learn to
as to live in harmony.

A. ignore B. tolerate C. fight

7. Intermarriages help to unite families from different .
A. schools B. hospitals C. likes D. cultures

8. Who normally teaches the young values and practices of their society?
A. Elders. B. Friends. C. Teachers. D. Churches.

9

. To deal with language differences can be used when Communicating
in communities.

A. an interpreter B. ateacher
C. a Pastor D. aleader

10. When two people from different Cultures marry itis |
A. an intermarriage B. asingle marriage
C. acultural marriage D. religious marriage

each other so

D. conquer



--- Page 28 ---
End of term one assessment

Paper 1: Thr 30 minutes
Marks: 30 marks

Multiple choice questions

Answer all the questions
1. Families trace their origin to .

A. the community B. the Supreme Being
| C. parents D. husbands
| 2. A family where one parent brings up a childisa ____ family
munities? A. nuclear B. single parent C. polygamous D. blended family
“Ill 3. Asingle parent family can also be refered toasa ___.
A. child headed family B. one parent family
| C. nuclear family D. extended family
| 4. A polygamous familyisalsoa ____.
| A. many wives B. nuclear family
Fparents C. one father family D. monogamus family
inti - 5. Chieftainships belong fo related ___.
A. families B. nations
| C. urban communities D. all elders
5 to | 6. Your father's brothers are called ___.
i A. uncles B. aunts C. cousins D. nieces
| 7. A ___ shows the order of one's line of decent.
oth Tr A. community B. lineage C. church D. elders
i 8. Animals are usually used as symbols of people's ____.
ir A. surnames B. groups C. origins D. totems
9. Families trace their religions to ____.
| | A. the father B. the earth
ety? C. the Supreme Being D. Allah
3 ’ 10. Your mother's sister is your ____.
I = atin | A. cousin B. aunt C. mother D. sister
| 9 11. respect the family as the basis for a peaceful society.
| A. Religions B. People C. Gods D. Children
"| 12. Howmany officiallanguages arerecognisedin the Zimbabwean Constitution?
| A. Three B. Two C. Ten D. Sixteen
13. A family where the eldest child takes care of his or her siblingsisa ___.
A. child headed B. one parent
C. nuclear D. traditional
14. In Judaism, are arranged by the families of the bride and groom.
A. ceremonies B. marriages

C. gatherings D. couples



--- Page 29 ---
. Your mother's mother is called
. The Moslems believe that what marries are not individuals but

. The money of dowry paid by the groom's family in Islam is used by the

A. groom B. bride C. families D. community
. At home, siblings are taught not to with each other.
A. sing B. fight C. laugh D. share

. In Judaism they belive marriage is directed by

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

A. aunt B. mother-in-law C. grandmother D. mother

A. families B. churches C. religions D. grooms

A. Mahr B. people C. Priest D. God
seal the promise to marry in Judaism by breaking a plate during the
engagement ceremony.

A. Fathers B. Bride and Groom

C. Mothers D. Aunts

Who signs the contract or agreement of marriage?

A. Mother. B. Father.

C. Priest. D. Two people who wish to marry.
Who is believed to always guide a marriage in Judaism?

A. Ancestors B. God

C. Parents D. Aunts and Uncles

Most religions believe that a blessed marriage should have ____

A. divorce B. children C. gifts D. riches

A ___ joins the bride and the groom in a Christian marriage.

A. marriage officer B. elders

C. bride maid D. best man

How did the poor pay for their bride price in the traditional system if they did

not have money for bride price?

A. Cattle B. Sheep C. Labour D. Money
Which marriage practice is found in both Christianity and Indigenous
Religion?

A. Kukumbira/Ukucela umlilo B. Forced marriages

C. Kuganha D. Eloping/Kutizira

The person who mediates in marriage arrangement between families is

called a

A. pastor | B. marriage officer
C. go-between D. Supreme Being
When a bride is forcefully taken, who has the responsibility of persuading the

bride to accept the arrangements.

A. Young man himself B. Young man’s family
C. Young woman's family D. Young lady's friends
The marriage ceremonies in indeginous societies are meant to show the bride

that she is
A. greedy B. rejected in the family
C. accepted in the family D. not special



--- Page 30 ---
marry.

f they did

bs
les is
ding the

he bride

30. A marriage between people of two different religions and cultures is called

A. intermarriage B. cultural marriage
C. Christian marriage D. Moslem marriage
31. Communities are made up of ___.
A. religions B. children C. elders D. families
32. Who looks after children and animals while people work in community
projects?
A. Elderly B. Teachers C. Uncles D. Ancestors
33. ___ started a caring centre for people with leprosy at Mutemwa in Mutoko.
A. John Bradben B. Jairos Jiri
C. Mathew Rusike D. Mother Theresa
34. What differentiates humans?
A. Work. B. Church.
C. Culture. D. Food.
35. What builds a community?
A. Food B. Tolerance
C. Religion D. Height
36. Most religions believe _ made the earth and everything in it?
A. God B. People
C. Matthew Rusike D. Mother Theresa

37. When a child has no parents he is called _

A. adestitute B. an orphan C. child headed D. a step child
38. People attend funerals in the community to offer ____.

A. moral and emotional support  B. physical support

C. biological support D. crying support
39. A person with leprosy is called a _
A. leader B. leper C. learner D. levite
40. Communities do their work together to show ___.
A. difference B. unity C. disorder D. dishonesty
41. __ teach the young the expected values, skills, attitudes of the community
in indigenous communities.
A. Schools B. Teachers C. Elders D. Leaders
42. Awoman ____ when greeting her elders.
A. stoops B. kneels C. stands D. runs
43.1tis the ____ of the whole community to care for the elderly, sick and
disadvantaged.
A. responsibility B. choice
C. chance D. force
44. Give one practice that can unite families from different cultural and religious
groups.
A. Beer parties B. Ceremonies

C. Intermarriages D. Wars



--- Page 31 ---
45. Families expect protection and help from their .

A. enemies B. neighbours C. ancestors = D. books
46. It is not enough to feel sorry for the needy, one should also ___.
A. neglect them B. help them
C. taken them work D. cry with them
47. Community facilities include the following except ____.
A. clinic B. church C. school D. books
48. The mother of a bride is called ___.
A. father-in-law B. mother-in-law
C. brother-in-law D. sister-in-law
49. Who are not needy from among the following?
A. Sick people B. Elderly people
C. Young and strong D. Disabled
50. We should ____ people who are different from us.
A. light B. defeat C. fear D. tolerate

Structured questions

Paper 2: 1 hr 30 minutes

Section A 30 marks

1. are the first teachers to teach children values, language and behaviour.

. The spirit of ___ makes members of the community help each other. [1]
The look after children while the able bodied work on projects. [1]
When there isa in the community all work is suspended. [1]
Services like roads, schools and clinics are ____ owned. [1]
__ is usually drunk at community gatherings. ul
____is the spirit of oneness and unity. [1] |
The whole ____ is responsible for teaching its young life skills. [1]
In Islam, families ____ marriages. [1]
0. People give each other ____ support in times of hardships. [1]
1. The elderly, sick, poor and disabled are considered the ____ ofthe community.

[1]
12. A___ headed family has no parents in it at all. [1]
13. ___ established Mutemwa Leprosy Centre. [1]
14. Communities work together to build ____. [1]
15. What is tolerance? my
16. What is a totem? [1]
17. Name two indigenous methods or ways of marrying. [2]
18. Who directs and guides marriages in Judaism? mn
19. Who should care for elderly and aging parents? : [2]

—Z0®NOU AWN


--- Page 32 ---
20. State three animals that are used as totems in Zimbabwe. [3]
21. started a home for disabled people in Zimbabwe. [1]
22. Do unto others as you would ___. [1]
23. Women ____ while young men and boys ____ when greeting the elders. [2]

20 marks

here are five questions. Answer any FOUR.

- When carrying out community projects, what roles do the following people
do? Give one example for each.
Children
Young and able bodied
Elderly
Women
Men

In indigenous communities what does a young man who has no
money to pay lobola do?

What is the engagement contract for marriage called in Judaism?
Who arranges marriages in Islam?

What unites people of different cultures and religions?

What does a caring society teach its young?

Kneeling is a sign of in indigenous societies.

What are neighbours expected to do for each other during hard times?
[1]

Child minding is a role left for the in the community. [1]

How many languages are recognised in Zimbabwe? [1]
Write down two names of these languages. [2]
Families trace their origins back to whom? [1]
What do people use as totems in indigenous Zimbabwe? [1]

The person who mediates in the marriage negotiations is called. [1]
Who presides over a marriage ceremony in Christianity? [2]
A bride price can also be called [1]
An announcement in church of a man and woman's intention to marry
iscalled ___. [1



--- Page 33 ---
Religion

Introduction

Religion is about beliefs, faith, moral guidance and worshipping of an all powerful
Supreme Being also called Mwari/Umlimu/Allah/God in other languages or
religions. The Supreme Being in each religion is believed to be in control of all
that happens to humanity and on earth. Individual religions have a spiritual order
they believe in and have unique symbols, rituals and practices they follow. Most
religions believe in life after death and most of their practices aim to create good
people so that they will qualify for happy life after death.



--- Page 34 ---
nit 5: Concept of religion

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. list major religions in Zimbabwe
2 state the advantages of belonging to a religion.

| Background
Religion is about a set of belief systems that one follows. It gives one an identity and
set of principles and lifestyle. Each religion has a well defined system of practice
marked by its values, ceremonies and symbols. Religioninfluences the way a person
sees the world. Religion mainly teaches about honesty, sympathy, kindness, love,
purity, and being just. Most religions hold festivals, sermons, sacrifices, initiation
ceremonies and other rites. Some religions are practiced all over the world while

some are indigenous, making them smaller.

Key words
| / Religion belief

5A. Religion in the country

all powerful |
guages or |
ontrol of all |
ritual order
ollow. Most |
reate good

People from different religions



--- Page 35 ---
A lot of different religions are practiced in Zimbabwe. Religion is the belief
worship of a god or a superhuman. The four major ones are:

a) Christianity b) Islam
c) Indigenous Religion d) Judaism

There are a number of others like Buddhism and Hinduism. However, these are na
dominant in the country. Their following is not as large as the ones listed above.

Advantages of belonging to a religion

Religion is about a set of belief systems that one follows. Belief is an acceptance
that something exists or is true. There are a number of advantages of belonging 1¢
a religion. Some of them are:

a) It gives an individual a sense of identity.

b) It promotes forgiveness.

c) Beliefs in religion help people follow certain principles.

d) It helps to create empathetic individuals.

e) It teaches the value of life.

f) It teaches people to treat each other as they would like to be treated.
g) It promotes unity.

h) It teaches forgiveness.

All the different religions believe in forgiveness and unity. Being part of a religio
helps in building a community with people who are able tolive togetherin harmony.

Activity 1

1. Research on the religious groups found in your school.
2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of belonging to a religion.

Exercise 1

List the four main religions found in Zimbabwe.
Each religion believes in the existence of a powerful _.
. Religion gives a person a sense of __.
Which other two religions are not common in Zimbabwe?
. Which religion was practiced in Africa before the introduction of other

religions?
_ State two advantages of belonging to a religion.
Religion shapes a person's .



--- Page 36 ---
le belief i

1 above,

| Ptanc S

a religion
parmony.

2se are nof a

onging to

mmary

The four main religions in Zimbabwe are Christianity, Judaism, Islam and
Indigenous Religion.

Areligion is a set of belief systems and practices that guide the behaviour of its
members.

All religions believe in the existence of a powerful Supreme Being.

Each religion has its set of ceremonies, practices and rituals.

Indigenous Religion was the main religion practiced in Africa before the
infroduction of other religions.

One advantage of belonging to a religion is that it gives you a sense of identity.

a believer and follower of Jesus Christ.
a person who believes in Islam.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Religion is the belief and worship of a .
A. god B. free C. cow D. church

2. Which of the following is an example of a religion?

A. Muslim B. Jew C. Judaism D. Christian
is a religion not dominant in Zimbabwe.

A. Indigenous Religion B. Buddhism

C. Judaism D. Islam

Which religion is practised by the indigenous people of Zimbabwe?

A. Islam B. Judaism

C. Christianity D. Indigenous Religion

What has the power to influence the way people see the world?

A. Religion B. Food C. Greed D. Systems

One advantage of belonging to a religion is .

A. it promotes anger B. it killsits people

C. it teaches forgiveness D. itis away of passing time

. Religion gives a person a sense of .

A. belonging B. slavery C. anger D. lying
is acceptance that something exists.

A. Crying B. Beating others up

C. Belief D. Pain



--- Page 37 ---
the end of this unit you should be able to:
name national ancestors :
state the various roles played by the national ancestors in the liberation of
Zimbabwe

3. name religious ceremonies/festivals done in families

4. list religious ceremonial artefacts

5. state the items of ritual clothing worn by practitioners

6. explain the roles of lineages and totems
7
8
9

By

N —

. describe ceremonial attire and artefacts
. draw various ceremonial attire and artefacts
. identify religious practitioners
10. describe religious practioners
11. name key teachings
12. describe values that relate to the environment
13. state penalties for disrespecting the environment.

Background

Indigenous people's religious practices have a lot of similarities though with some
small variations in materials and rituals. Indigenous Religion relies heavily on spirit
mediums, divinations and dialogue between the living and the dead. Indigenous
Religion believe a lot in guidance from the ancestral spirits who can direct a
lot of things affecting the living. For example, during the liberation struggle the
spirit mediums played an important role in protecting, guiding and advising the
liberation fighters. They are believed to have been under the influence and
power of the spiritual world. Indigenous Religion has special attire and items
associated with particular religious groups. In Indigenous Religion there are
family, community, territorial and national ceremonies held at different places
and times. Indigenous Religion believes that all wrong doing will be punished by

the Supreme Being. Punishment can come through in the form of environmental
disasters.

¢ Key words

4 religious practitioners spirit mediums environment shrine
attire ritual



--- Page 38 ---
there are
nt places
nished by
pnmental

with some

A. National ancestors

ational ancestors played important roles

the liberation of Zimbabwe. Some
oncestors are respected throughout the
ation for the outstanding work they did
socially and religiously. Examples of these are:
—haminuka, Sekuru Kaguvi, Mbuya Nehanda,
alandela kaNdaba and Thobela. They
payed different rolesin fighting for the people
> Imbabwe. Some were spirit mediums and
po-Detweens, between the people and the
estors. A spirit medium is a person able to
communicate with the dead and the living
anc is possessed by an ancestral or alien
sort for religious reasons. They all worked
2 different times. Others even worked
pefore the Chimurenga/Umvukela wars, for
ple, Malandela kaNdaba.

.
SN -—

Mbuya Nehanda and Sekuru Kaguvi

= national ancestors played various roles in uniting the indigenous people
29ainst a common enemy. Some of the ancestors mentioned above, for example
Chaminuka, foretold national and territorial events like the coming of the white
in 1890. During the liberation struggle some spirit mediums gave freedom
Sgnhters instructions from the ancestors and Mwari. Others, like Mbuya Nehanda,

1 0

pon SPINE see gly resisted colonial rule, thus, they were hanged for their participation. She
: she =n declared that even if they hung her, her spirit would still rise and another
Cl a Se

urenga war would be fought.

uggle the

Ivising the | EXet (1 \YA|

nce and . - i i

Ind items a Research about the National ancestors of Zimbabwe. Find out their names

and roles played before, during and after the liberation struggle.
©] Prepare a table that shows the role played by each of the ancestors you
came up within ‘a’ above.

Exercise 1

List two national ancestors.
Nehanda was male. [True/False]

Who foretold the coming of the white man?

Which ancestor strongly resisted the coming of the white man?

Which ancestor was influential before the Chimurenga wars?

State one important role the ancestors played in the country.

What did some of the ancestors do to help freedom fighters during the
liberation struggle?

SOO



--- Page 39 ---
6B. Religious ceremonies/festivals in families

and from then on they can eat the rest of the crops. People are not allowed t
eat any ripe crops before this ceremony as this is viewed as failure to respect th
ancestors and may resultin a drought in the next farming season. Some thanks givin
ceremonies are done when a child is born. The family slaughter a goat and clos
family members are invited. Families also hold ceremonies as communities wer
they ask for rain. This ceremony is called the rain making ceremony (Mukwererq i
Shona/Ukwebula ingxoza in Ndebele). They usually hold it at Njelele in Matopos.

Another example of a ceremony is bira/ukuthethela. This is a family ceremon
where family members air out their requests to the ancestors by pouring beer an

general thanksgiving. The ceremony is usually held at the family home.

Religious ceremonial artefacts

Religious ceremonies are conducted differently inline with the culture of the family.
During these ceremonies, different artefacts are used. Examples are:

a) Wooden plate

b) Snuff container

c) Raw tobacco mound

d) Ceremonial spear



--- Page 40 ---
Ffova guva
sgiving ana
> thank the
em a good
Ie ancestors
[ollowed ta
espect the
lanks giving
it and close
nities were!
kwerera in
Matopos.

Animal skin

Headgear
(ngundu/ingundu/indlukula)

ceremony:
g beer and
estral spirits
2 ancestors
olve them.
pres and

Beads
= for religious practitioners

sicious practitioners have different attires for their different roles. Religious
ijoners are people who specialise in religious behaviours or use spiritual power
=nce others. Religious attires are ceremonial clothes and jewellery. Examples
= are the animal skin (cloth and hat/ngudu/ingundu/indlukula), african
wr=ral, materials/clothes of some colours and beads. The above pictures show
mples of the attire of practitioners.

OC

the family.

. Choose one family ceremony and dramaftise it.
Find family ceremonies that are practiced in your community and write
‘about one.

A ceremony where the indigenous people request for rain from the
Supreme Being is called ____

To which national shrine do the indigenous people go to ask for rain in

“me of drought?

identify any other ceremonies practiced by indigenous groups.

what do the people do when they have a good harvest in indigenous
groups?

What are the two roles of ancestors?

why is thanksgiving ceremony held in Indigenous Religion?

Whnat are religious practitioners?

Family success and happiness can be celebrated through which ceremony
n Indigenous Religion?

~~



--- Page 41 ---
6C. Roles of lineages and totems

Family posing for a photograph

Totems are usually creatures found on land, in water, plants or trees or any natura
object specially linked with the individual, family group and ancestral spiritse ©
Totems serve different purposes in different groups. In Zimbabwe totems are used
for relationships, marriage and lineage purposes. Totems are respected and usea

with certain practices. For example, people of the same totem should not mari

each other because they are considered to be of the same blood. If people
of the same totem marry it is considered incest. A ritual called kuchekaukama
ukuquma ubuhlobo/breaking the relationship is performed as a way of notifying
the ancestors. A ritual is a religious or solemn ceremony with various activities. A
spotless white ox is slaughtered and the meat is eaten with certain herbs. This is
to make sure that the children born out of this marriage are not cursed or weak. i»

Totems are also used for protection, appreciation and encouragement. One
faboo in Indigenous Religion is that an individual should not eat the meat of their
totem. For example, those of the elephant totem should not eat elephant meat, -
Through totems and lineages, indigenous people are able to find relationship links:
Lineages are a direct result of totems where individuals or families can trace their
history and origin. Lineages are helpful and play important roles in traditional’
leadership. Totems and lineages are very important as they help people reconnect
after generations have passed and families have moved to settle in far away!

areas.
(3s ) |

=


--- Page 42 ---
veak.

’ One
f their
meat.
D links.
e their
ional
nect
away

natural
I spirits.
re used
d used
t marry

In pairs, write down the differences between totems and lineages.
. List ceremonial artefacts.

“xercise 3

Name any three items that can be used as totems.
What is the colour of an ox that is slaughtered at a ritual where people of the
same totem have married?

What helps to connect people's relationships in indigenous communities?
Find any two uses of totems in Zimbabwe.

What links an individual or family to their origin?

What are totems used for?

D. Artefacts and attire

ious groups use different attire
nd artefacts for different occasions
ONC purposes. An attire is a set of
oes of a specified kind. In the
there are specific artefacts
men and for women. Each man
Supposed to have a spear, a bow
nc arrow for hunting, defence
3 for ritual purposes. Each man
& expected to keep a knobkerrie.

~

kame > man's food is supposed to be

tifying #=rved in wooden plafes and if he Indigenous Religion Artefacts

E A 2s the plates are positioned face -

| This if SC until the time of bringing the spirit back/kurova guva/umbuyiso. The chief is

= custodian of all functions, ceremonies and rituals. Any ceremony that happens
one's area is under the traditional leader.

Indigenous leadership is based on seniority in lineages and chieftainship. The one
#2 be anointed as chief has to be given that chieftainship's regalia which usually
includes animal skin, hat, walking stick and in some chieftainships, a gun. In some
indigenous groups the king is also given a head dress/ngundu. The chieftainship
regalia and items are won on special occasions.

Some spirit mediums do not wear modern clothes but clothes of traditional design
made from animal skin. Traditional healers use items such as the head dress/

- ngundu/indlukula, bones/hakata/amathambo, beads, necklaces, snail shells, a
fessebe’s tail/ tail of a ngongoni (wildbeast), snuff and leg rattles.



--- Page 43 ---
Activity 4

1. Research and find out artefacts and their uses by the following:
a) Traditional healer
b) King

2. Make a role play of any spirit medium at work.

Exercise 4

. State three artefacts used by indigenous people.

. Who owns utensils in indigenous communities?
Find two items used when performing rituals in Indigenous Religion.
Indigenous men have their food served in ____ plates.
List three items given to an anointed chief in indigenous communities.
Which item is won on the head by the spirit mediums?

. Religious practitioners

A n'anga/Inyanga

Most processes in the life of indigenous people are linked and at times difficult to
separate. Traditional leadership which includes, the chiefs, headman and village
heads play a political and religious role. The traditional leaders exercise authority
because of lineages and traditional power. In practice, the local leaders are
custodians of the values, traditions and culture which they do in honour and on



--- Page 44 ---
fficult to
I village
Uthority
ers are
and on

20 O0TNION I ERT

of of ancestors of that land. During the coronation and anointing of each
oer, rituals are performed to inform the ancestors and the Supreme Being.

some areas there are territorial spirits whose role is to warn, inform, protect,
smemand and guide the living while working with the ancestors like Nehanda

3 Chaminuka. Ancestral spirits have a role to intervene in the life of the living
wouch the spirit medium. Usually, most indigenous families have spirit mediums.
sese spirit mediums are the link between the living and the dead. Indigenous
ames can call for the help of the ancestors through the family spirit medium. This
,@one in times of misfortune, happiness or when they need guidance on certain

eS

socditional healers/n’angas/inyanga are also part of religious practitioners. They
an be divided into various groups. These include those who can fortune tell using
her bones/hakata/amathambo, those who can heal illnesses and those who
2an cast out evil spirits.

here is also what is known as rain making spirit mediums/manyusa. They lead the
#ual for requesting for rain. These work in a local area usually under a chieftainship.
fhen there is a drought, the rain making spirit mediums would group together
and make a trip fo the national rain making Njelele shrine at Matopos (EMatojeni/
Mobweadziva) to plead with the ancestors and Supreme Being to give people

2n. A shrine is a place regarded as holy because of its association with a divinity

or a sacred person. During such ceremonies the pure women/mbonga would

the beer to be used during the ritual.

Activity 5

. Find out about any three Indigenous Religious practioners and explain their
functions.
In groups, state any one practitioner you understand well and dramatise
their work?
Listen as a resource person explains about religions practitioners in Indigenous
Religion.

Exercise 5

What is the work of a traditional leader like a chief, headman or village
head?

Who links the living and the dead in indigenous communities?

Who leads in a ceremony for asking for rain?

Indigenous people believe that rain comes from the

Where is the national indigenous rain making shrine in Zimbabwe?

Who brews the beer for the rain making ritual?

What is the role of the family spirit mediums?

What do traditional healers use to foretell or explain events?

To which national shrine do the indigenous people go to ask for rain in times
of drought?

—t
.



--- Page 45 ---
éF. Key teachings

| am because you are

Ndebele saying, “Umuntu ngumuntu ngaban
Vumunhu amongst people of the same clan,
who they are because of the people around

Revering ancestors

tu" helps to show the Unhu/Ubunt

community and country as they ars
them.

A family revering ancestors
Revering ancestors is showing deep respect, a
In Indigenous Religion, ancestors are res
Everyone cancommunicate withthe ance
heads of families have the honour and du

ppreciating and honouring them,
pected and held in high regard. No
storsdirectly. Spirit mediums and chosen



--- Page 46 ---
eness with nature and wildlife

genous Religion, wildlife and nature are viewed as a gift from the Supreme
Po. There are taboos that protect wildlife and nature from misuse or disrespect.
example, Indigenous Religion teaches followers to treat animals with respect.
he animals that are slaughtered for food have to be prepared in a certain
#at does not offend ancestors or nature. There are forests that are considered
»=C and people should not hunt in them or cut down trees for firewood. Also,
naigenous Religion people have totems that are under nature and wildlife. This
» means they cannot kill or eat the meat of their totem as they are considered
2 with them. For example, a person of the Buffalo/Nyati/Nyathi totem cannot
ana eat the buffalo as it is that person's totem animal. The same thing applies
hose of the Shumba/Sibanda totem as they cannot eat lion meat. This is a way
weserving the environment and wildlife from being extinct.

' principle
ommunity.,
fospers it i
Wnity. The
u/Ubuntu/
Is they are

= groups of 5, come up with other key teachings of Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu
at have not been mentioned above.

Recife the values of Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu.

Act out a scene that shows respect for the ancestors, be it bira/ukuthethela
or celebration of a new born baby to the family.

The concept of Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu also states that, ‘lam because ___.
Torever ancestorsis fo.

People of the Shumba/Sibanda totem can only eat lion meat. [True/False]
Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu also addresses the way people slaughter ____.
State one purpose of taboos that has been mentioned above.

What do you think would happen to people who go against nature and
wildlife taboos?

Helping other people is also a way of showing _.

Ancestors are treated with so much respect that they are told about
that happens in a family or clan. [everything/one thing]

g them.
ard. Not
chosen
istors on
I places
vith the
ad rain

8G. Indigenous Religion and the environment

sdigenous Religion works well with the environment which it regards as its source

by are » medicine, food, attire, tools and artefacts. An environment is the natural world

oorn fo = a whole or a particular area where humans operate. Some natural sources

4h of = pools, hills and frees are used as shrines and sacred places. Tree barks, roots,
o)

=aves and fruits can all be used for religious purposes.



--- Page 47 ---
Indigenous Religion places great
importance and respect on the
environment. There are guidelines
and taboos that protect the
environment and people. Some
places, trees, rivers, pools, animals
and rocks are considered sacred
and it is not good for people to
use them anyhow. These are
respected and given great
honour. Examples of places that
are treated with respect in
Indigenous Religion as they are
considered sacred are Njelele,
Chinhoyi Caves, Mount Nyangani
and Mbelele.

There are also taboos that are
in relation to trees. For example,
it is a taboo to throw stones at
trees so as to pick fruits. Trees are
to be treated with great respect
and honour. It is also a taboo to
clean pots with soot at the river
as it is said to be disrespectful to the ancestors and spirits of the place. It is alse
taboo for just anyone to go to Njelele. Onl i

There are a number of penalties for disrespecting some of the environmental laws
in Indigenous Religion. For example, if one swims in sacred rivers and pools it is said
that they may be taken by mermaids. Also, the chiefs fine those who go against
environmental laws like cutting down sacred trees or hunting.sacred animals like
the pangolin. The wrongdoers either pay money, goats or cattle as a fine.



--- Page 48 ---
Activity 7

. Find out ways in which people show the sacredness of the environment and

present in front of the class.

Listen to an Indigenous Religion resource person as they explain taboos and
penalties of not respecting the sacred environment.

~xercise 7

. State 2 sacred places in Indigenous Religion.
If one swims or baths in sacred rivers or pools they may be taken by _
What happens to people who say bad things on Mount Nyangani?

What is a taboo?

Who is allowed at Njelele?

What is the role of chiefs in protecting the sacred environment?

All frees can be used for firewood. [True/False]

State three penalties that one may face when they break sacred
environmental laws.

Indigenous people trace their lineages through their ancestors and straight to
the Supreme Being.
Religious ceremonies and festivals can be performed from family, community

tain times, and national levels.

if anything The Liberation struggle/Umvukela/Chimurenga was named in honour of
aring fro Murenga the father of Mushavatu, Nehanda and Chaminuka.

nd forests Totems serve both a social and religious role in indigenous communities.
domestic Religious practitioners such as fortune tellers, traditional healers and spirit
domestic mediums use artefacts and attire from the environment.

Indigenous people, communicate with the Supreme Being via the ancestors

family. Fo ‘
during ceremonies held at shrines and other sacred places.

an cause
2 used fo
d to have!

—- the ceremony of crowning a sovereign.

— sexudl relations between people seen as related or too close
to marry each other.

— asupernatural water creature that is pelioved toliveinsacred
pools and whose upper body is human and the bottom part is
like the lower part of a fish. -

— akitchen utensil used to beat food for aeration or making the

food smooth.

ental laws
ils it is said

against
imals like



--- Page 49 ---
En

d of unit assessment

=a

hi EE = 2

A Ti ryt ia EEN
ultiple choice questions
1. Two national spirit mediums who helped in the first war of liberation were

=a

A. Toverq and Mutavuto

B. Murenga and Mambiri

C. Mushavaty and Nehandqg D. Nehandg and Kaguvi
2. The war of liberation js named after which great ancestor?

A. Murenga B. Toverg C. Mambiri D. Mushavaty
3. What do indigenous People use to trace their lineages?

A. Attire B. Artefacts C. Totems D. Mediums
4. Indigenous People get their attire and artefacts from —

church B. caves
C. environment D. religious practitioners

5. Whom among these Communicates wit
People during ceremonies.
A. Prophets B. Spirit mediums C. Pastors

é. Indigenous people use materials such gs
their ancestors.

h the ancestors on behqif of the

D. Mermaids
during ceremonies to inform

roots B. unclean Pots C. beer ang snuff D. shoes
7. Where do the indigenous people visit the Supreme Being to ask for rain?
Njelele B. Chororodzivg
C. Great Zimbabwe D. Chinhoyji
8. What can Cause a water source to dry up?
A. Washing utensils with soot. B. Wooden plates.
C. Shells.

D. Animal tails.
9. What happens to g person who disrespects the e
sacred forests, shrines and other sacred places?

nvironment including

A. Punished B. Ignored C. Praised D. Promoted
10. as custodians of the land can fine the wrong doers.
A. Mermaids B. Shrines C. Chiefs D. Lineages

Structured questions
tional ancestors who played gq partin the Umvukelq

1. Write down any three nq
Chimurenga War.

qQ) b C)

2. Name any three artefacts that are used in indigenous religious ceremonies
and rituals.
a)

- b) c)
st any three national religious shrines found in Zimbabwe.
r

Li
4. What three natural things can be dirtied by unclean utensils and pots with
Soot?

q) b)
5. State any three animals that are totems.
a b



--- Page 50 ---
it 7 Christianity

Objectives

ition were #By the end of the unit you should be able to:

. list the names of Jesus Christ's disciples

2. define a parable

deduce meaning from the parable

list ceremonies/festivals in Christianity

discuss the significance of ceremonies/festivals in Christianity
identify different artefacts and attire in Christianity

I. identify religious practitioners in Christianity

~ describe religious practitioners in Christianity

. identify key teachings in Christianity

0. suggest Christian ways of conserving the environment
1. justify the need for good use of the environment

2. identify prohibited food in Christianity.

of the

ids
o inform

ckground

Christianity is one of the biggest religions in the world. It is formed around Jesus
Christ's life and teachings. Christianity was spread around the world firstly by His
sciples then by His followers. The disciples, Peter and Paul, took the religion to
ame, the capital of the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire accepted the Christian
sachings and Christianity became the Empire's main religion. Christian followers
ave festivals such as Christmas, Easter and Pentecost. Christians have religious
= which they wear for different occasions, ceremonies and rituals. Christian
pociitioners include pastors, evangelists, prophets, apostles, teachers, priests and
hops. Christians believe in the existence of one God, the Holy Spirit and the life
3 teachings of Jesus Christ, his death, resurrection and life after death. Christians
lieve in good use of the environment for the benefit of all creatures. This calls for
yotective and responsible use of the environment. Some Christian groups do not
a certain foods based on their religious teachings and practices.

rrain?

including

mvukela/ | Key words

disciples festivals beatitude parables artefacts parable

emonies [FT

JA. Jesus Christ's life and ministry

F =<us Christ's ministry started after he had been baptised by John the Bapfist in the
} =r Jordan. John told the people that Jesus was the promised Messiah and frue

pots with [Bee of God. When Jesus had been baptised by John, the Holy Spirit came down

= a dove and landed on him. A voice was heard saying, “This is my beloved son
FE = whom | am well pleased.” This was witnessed by many people. He then went
on fo choose and call his disciples. A disciple is a follower of Christ.



--- Page 51 ---
Jesus then called four fishermen, Simon Peter, Andrew, James and John (sons
Zebedee) to be his disciples. He also called Matthew who was a Tax collector.

other disciples called were Philip, Thomas, James of Alpheus, Simon the Canaani
Bartholomew also named Nathaniel, Thaddaeus and Judas Iscariot. Before Jeg

Christ's crucifixion, resurrection and ascension, he prepared Peter to take over
leadership of the disciples.

Sermon on the mount

Sermon on the mount

Jesus’ ministry revolved around three major things, which are preaching, teachi
and healing. Jesus once preached to multitudes while at the edge of a mounta
this sermon was called ‘The sermon on the Mount". In his sermon on the Mount
taught about the Beatitudes, Beatitudes are a list of blessings listed by Jesus in
sermon on the mount. The Beatitudes are as follows:

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.

Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall b
satisfied.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God.

Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is th
kingdom of heaven.



--- Page 52 ---
| John (sons ¢arable of the two sons
collector. T Son 1

ne Canaanitd g)
I. Before Jes
take over th

Son, go and work ¢
foday | in fhe vineyard | ~

Ty =
today | in the vineyard J- 2% «73

ng, teachi
fa mountai
he Mount

y Jesusin t

But he did not go.

nis teachings, Jesus used parables. A parable is a simple story used to illustrate
moral or spiritual lesson, as told by Jesus. These are stories about people and
=nfs on earth which made people understand heavenly teachings. One such
arable is the parable of the two sons. Itis found in the Christian Bible in the book of
#ofithew 21: 28-32. In this parable the father asked the first son to go and do some
od work in the field and he refused. He then went to the second son who accepted
‘theirs is the = go and do the work but did not do it. The first son later decided to go and do

he work the father had requested. Jesus asked, “whois the better of the two?" In
is parable, Jesus taught that it is the action which is more important than words.

4 shall be



--- Page 53 ---
Activity 1

1. List any two parables from Jesus’ teachings that you know.
2. Complete this table by matching the beatitudes.

A | Blessed are the poorin spirit for they shall be satisfied.

B Blessed are the peacemakers for they will inherit the earth.

C Blessed are they who moun for theirs is the kingdom of heaven
D Blosser rahe mesk i oo will be called children of

£ Blessed are those who hunger for they shall be comforted.
and thirst for righteousness

Exercise 1

Name any four of Jesus' disciples.

What does the parable of the two sons teach us?

What is a parable?

Where was Jesus when he preached about the Beatitudes?
Write any two Beatitudes in full.

What are the three things that Jesus’ Ministry centered on?
Who was chosen to lead the disciples after Jesus had gone?
Who announced the start of Jesus’ Ministry?

ONO hWN—

7B. Religious ceremonies/
festivals

Christians celebrate important events
in their religion through festivals and
ceremonies such as Christmas and
Easter. During Christmas they celebrate
the birth of Jesus Christ. Christmas is
celebrated on the 25th of December
of every year. On Christmas, they
worship, praise, sing, dance and feast.
They also make this a time of giving,
sharing and showing people love.

Another important festival in Christianity is Easter. Durin —
how Jesus was betrayed by Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples and was sentence
to death by Pontius Pilate. Jesus Christ was then crucified on Good Friday ang

=


--- Page 54 ---
®= on Easter Sunday. During
per, Christians celebrate Jesus’
ection and believe that his
ection removed their sins.
days after his resurrection, he
Bcended fo heaven. Ten days after
Bsus’ ascension, Christians believe
BF he sent them the Holy Spirit on a
=n‘ecost day. Pentecost marks the
=n of the Christian church.

heav
ildren

of

Crucifixion of Jesus

Activity 2
|. Dramatise the suffering (passion) of Jesus Christ during Easter.
Write or recite any Christmas hymns sung about Jesus Christ.

cxercise 2

What do Christians celebrate on 25 December of each year?
After resurrection, where did Jesus ascend to?

What marked the beginning of the Christian church?

Why is Easter considered the greatest Christian festival?

On what day was Jesus crucified?

Who sentenced Jesus Christ fo death?

Which one of the twelve disciples betrayed Jesus?

Why is the resurrection considered important by Christians?

(0 Sp ne

Religious artefacts and attire

“hristians use various artefacts in their day to day religious
chvities. An artefact is an object made by a human
=ng. These differ with denominations but the common
ss include the cross, candles, the Bible, the alter, the
and tabernacle. The cross is the symbol for showing
at one is a Christian. If represents that Jesus died for his
powers on the Cross so that their sins could be forgiven.
2 chalice is the cup where wine that symbolises Jesus’
ood is served with bread during the holy communion, a
2eremony done in remeberance of the last supper Jesus
2a with his disciples. The bread symbolises Jesus' body
3 is shared amongst the believers as a sign of unity and oneness with Jesus. This
A % Sone in remembrance of Jesus’ suffering on the cross. The Bible is the Holy book
remembet =F christians and is the source of Christian teachings and values.

sentencea =mbers of different Christian groups have ways of uniquely identifying with their
Friday ana @arficular groups through use of badges, uniforms and stoles (church garments).

DSO

A cross



--- Page 55 ---
Christian religious practitioners and followers wear different attire for partic
ceremonies, services and functions. They include items such as uniforms

Activity 3

1. Choose any two Christian artefacts and explain their importance.
2. Make a chart of cuttings of various Christians in their Christian attire.
3. Make a collage of Christian artefacts

Exercise 3

What does the Christian Bible teach?

Which symbol reminds Christians of Jesus's crucifixion?
Why do Christians respect the alter as a holy place?
What does the chalice represent in Christianity?

How are members of different Christian groups identified?

PNA WN =

When are rings used in the Christian religion?

7D. Religious practitioners

The Christian religion has many
practitioners. These include, pe
priests, pastors, evangelists,
prophets, teachers, apostles
and bishops. Different
Christian groups have different |
structures and practices which |§
influence how they practice

their religion.

Different religious practitioners in Christianity

Priestsleadin religious services,
rituals and ceremonies and
use holy water in their religious
practices. In some Christian groups the religious practitioners use holy oil to conduc
their rituals and ceremonies. Pastors conduct services and lead congregations @

the Christian word and are largely responsible for converting new members tg
Christianity in their churches or groups. Some religious groups have prophets, soma
of them have healing powers and use these powers in their religious practice. Soma
prophets lead congregations while others work within some groups. Apostles are


--- Page 56 ---
ire for particuld ious practitioners who regard themselves as sent by Jesus Christ and have the
05 Uniforms f@me mission as Jesus” disciples.

- i po hers of religion work in the same way as the evangelists. They explain
JroupS hors a nferpret the meaning of the Bible feachings. Bishops are usually leaders of
Yers there is on churches, denominations or congregations. One becomes a bishop as a

wotion of having served in the church loyally and some become bishops by
g founders of the church. In some churches or groups, the bishops ordain
25's or pastors. Bishops are usually the most senior in the different churches,
2ups or denominations, depending on the church's structure while pastors,
Werends, priests, evangelists and teachers work under the bishop.

*

nce.
attire.

Choose a church/denomination and list its religious practitioners in their
order starting from the top.
Choose any two religious practitioners and write the religious work they do?

-xercise 4

What work does a priest do?
Which religious practitioner is regarded as having healing powers?
Whichreligious practitioner has the responsibility of converting new members?
Who do pastors and priests normally report to?

Which religious practitioners see their work as similar to that of Jesus’ disciples?
workin the same way as the evangelists?

Which religious leader has duty to ordain pastors or priests?

Most religious practitioners get their teachings from the _

Id functions?
5?

. Key teachings

believe in the existence of one God who is the Creator and Lord of
# universe and master of all the things on earth. They also believe that people
= created in God's image but people made God angry because of their sins.
mans believe that God is righteous and merciful and that is the reason why
c Er His son Jesus Christ on earth to die on the cross as a sacrifice to set all
oe who believe in him free. Christians teach that Jesus Christ was born of
ou Mary, and was sentenced to death by Pontius Pilate. He was crucified
2 @=d on the cross, on the third day he rose from the dead. This is called the
bil fo conduc on. After the resurrection Jesus ascended to heaven and sent down the

gregations oft -
gelists spreaditmsssio
‘members tc
pphets, some
bctice. Somes
Apostles are

believe in the existence of the Holy Spirit that works together with God
= Father and Jesus the son. Christians teach that the work of the Holy Spirit is to
ioe. protect and strengthen all those who do the work of God. Christians teach
> There is God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. The three of
=m work as one and that is called the Holy Trinity, meaning the Holy three.



--- Page 57 ---
Christians believe that God oversees and guides their life. They believe that

can tak to God and make requests through prayer. Christians teach that G
answers them by providing what the believers will have requested if they
according to Christian standards. Christians teach that the second coming
Jesus is near ang People should repent for them to be saved from final judgme

Activity 5

Christians believe in the existence of how many gods?
What does Holy Trinity mean?
How do Christians make their requests to God?

SC OUANWON —
2
>
~<
3
Q
wv
—
>
®
I
Oo
~
wn
°
3
purty

~ wm
oD
3
—
So
—
>
®
oO
Qo
®
<
®
wm
5
0
0
=
wn
==
Q
3
—_—
3S

Christians teach that God sent His son because the people on earth
had .

How can People prepare for the final judgment?

Who are referred to as the Holy Three by Christians?

0 N

7F. Christianity and the sw
environment Ex

From the time of Creation the
Bible clearly explains the need
for sound environmental care.
In the book of Genesis God
instructed Adam to take good
care of all creation Where
it says, “The Lord God took the
man and put him in the garden
of Eden to fill it ang keep it".
From this instruction, Christians
are expected to take care of
everything that was Created
by God. They are expected to be stewards. Stewards are those given the do

to keep and take care of something that js not theirs. Christians, as children

God, believe that they should use anything in the environment responsibly s
as not to offend Gog. Christians get their food, medicines, equipment, fresh a
and all that they need from the environment. It is important that Christians lik
other human beings participate in protecting and conserving the environme

Christians planting trees


--- Page 58 ---
in it?
sarth

tieve that tt

pr to ya

in the du
children ¢

#ans participate in activities such as planting of trees where there has been

tach that G F=station. In areas where they stay, they are taught to use available materials
ted if they oonsible ways so that the next generation will be able to find something to
ind coming | Sheir needs. In Zimbabwe, Christian groups and organisations are helping
final judgme ities with environmental projects such as using natural fertilisers in gardens,

=Clamation and reforestation. Some Christian groups own farms where they
animals and practice natural agriculture.

wstian schools and hospitals they have tried to protect trees, bushes and
= Dy fencing and restricting their use. They also protect the environment by
no these places clean.

*=Dafe on the importance of environmental care for Christians?
is how Christians conserve the environment.

fake a collection of cuttings that show some environmental care practices
Dy Christian groups.

Who was asked to care for God's creation?
=ow do Christian schools and hospitals show that they care for the
environment?
was Adam expected to take care of the garden?

Christians will not offend God if they take __ care of his creation.

S=iect any two important things Christians and other people get from the
environment?

Why should Christians participate in environmental care?

Why is clean air important to people?

are people encouraged to use natural fertilisers?

RX (®

Lobster Shark Oyster Crab

donsibly ans believe food is necessary for the growth and protection of the body.
i, fresh a f=Sons get instructions about what food to eat and what not to eat from the
istians lik = *=achings. Generally most Christian groups eat any edible food yet there are
vironmen##& me Christians who follow a certain diet and others who do not eat particular



--- Page 59 ---
kinds of food. Christians of the Seventh Day Advenstist Church generally a
eating meat in favour of a vegetarian diet. Some denominations do not eat

from animals such as pigs, ostrich, and rabbits. Such groups do not eat seq fo
such as smoked fish, breaded fish, shark, crab, lobster and craw fish. This is larg
because of their reference to the laws written in the Bible in the Old Testa

books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy. These were animals that were regarg
as unclean. However, other Christian groups have no food restrictions and t
based on Simon Peter's teachings in the New Testament where in a vision (A
10) it was revealed to him that no food is unclean for it was all created by God
humans. Some denominations like Anglicans, Catholics, and Lutherans obse

meat free day especially during the period leading to Easter which they call Le
Some Christians accept moderate consumption of alcohol while others do
accept consumption of alcohol at alll,

Activity 7

1. Research on Christian denominations that allow taking of alcohol.
2. Find the denominations that observe prohibition of eating certain foods ar
those with no food restrictions. Present your findings in class.

Exercise 7

Which books of the Old Testament prohibit eating of certain foods?

. State three foods prohibited for some Christian groups.

3. Which Christian groups observe a meat free day during the period lead
to Easter?

4. What do we call a diet where people eat food from plants only?

5. Whose teachings in the New Testament remove food restrictions fe
Christians?

6. What beverage drink is prohibited by some Christian groups a
denominations?

7. Name any two food sources regarded as unclean.

8. What are the two uses of food in the body?

Summary

* Jesus chose disciples to help him in His Ministry.

* Easter and Christmas are important festivals in Christianity.

* Christians use different artefacts for different ceremonies and functions.

Religious practitioners in Christianity are known by different names such
pastors, prophets, priests and bishops.

Christians teach that there is God the father, Jesus the son and the Holy Spi
* Christians believe in protecting the environment.

* Some Christians have food restrictions while others do not.


--- Page 60 ---
enerally avd
) not eat me
‘eat sea fog
.. This is large
Dd Testame
ere regards
ons and thi
a vision (Ag
ed by God
ans observe
they call Le
others do

— means the movement of going up or moving up.
— itis when you are exposed or sold out.

—- apicture that has been made by sticking pieces of coloured
paper and cloth onto paper.

— arecognised branch of the Christian Church.
— aditch formed by running water.
the process of claiming something back.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

lol.
In foods an =ow many disciples did Jesus Christ choose?
A. Three B. Twelve C. Eleven D. One
The parable of the two sons teaches that.
A. actions are more important than words
8. promises are important than actions
ds? C. sons and fathers should work together
D. brothers should work together
iod leading During which festival do Christians celebrate Jesus' birth?
A. Pentecost B. Easter C. Lent D. Christmas
I ) . What was taught to the people by Jesus on the Mount?
frictions fo A. Parables B. Beatitudes C. Temptations D. Sacrifice
During which period do Christians celebrate the death and resurrection of
fOUps ang 22sus Christ?
A. Easter B. Advent C. Lent D. Christmas
Sread, wine and candles are usually placed on.
A. Amat B. acup C. an alter D. achair
& collar is usually won by ___ in some Christian churches or groups.
A. followers B. practitioners C. converts D. children
Who makes up the trinity?
A. Jews, Christians and Moslems.
Bons. 8. Peter, Jesus and John.
Bes such 4 =. God the Father, Jesus the son and the Holy Spirit.
D. Bishop, Pastor and a prophet.
5 Hol 2 Which animal is considered unclean and should not be eaten by some
y Spi . Lo
Christian groups and denominations?
A. Goat B. Sheep C. Cow D. Pig
=. Christian food, medicines, equipment and fresh air come from the
A. environment B. source C. gullys D. gardens



--- Page 61 ---
Structured questions

. Name the first two disciples who were called by Jesus?

. Who baptised Jesus and where?

. State any two Christian festivals.

. What do candles represent in Christianity?

. What is an evangelist's work?

. In what ways can Christians help in conserving the environment?
. Why do some Christians not eat some food types?



--- Page 62 ---
it 8. Judaism

ojectives

2 end of the unit you should be able to:
iain the historical background of Judaism
2=nfify ceremonies/festivals in Judaism
2eniify artefacts and attire in Judaism
Bentify religious practitioners in Judaism
=07e fhe roles of religious practitioners in Judaism
S0ie key teachings in Judaism
=xplain key teachings in Judaism
suggest ways Jews conserve the environment
ify the need for good use of the environment
Sate Jewish food laws
=xplain the recommended Jewish food laws
iscuss why the Jews do not eat animal blood.

sc ground

2=m is the oldest religion originating in ancient Israel and Judea. The Jewish
believe that they were chosen when their ancestor Abraham was asked
Sod fo go from Ur in Mesopotamia to Canaan where he was going to be
==C and made into a great nation. The Jews believe that they were chosen
23 fo be a kingdom of priests and a Holy nation. They also believe that they
£hosen people who should be the light of the world. Judaism is the parent
pon of Christianity and Islam. Followers of Judaism believe that there is only
E Sod. Jewish teachings and practices are based on God's laws found in the
The Hebrews way of life, religion and customs are united by their common
B=Stors, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Every Jewish family should have the Torah,
Mezuzah and the Menorah for use in their daily religious practice. The Jewish
SE Co not separate their life from their religion. Amongst them you find, priests,
& ond scribes who oversee over their rites, ceremonies and rituals. Jewish
nas emphasise the importance of the day of rest, which is the Sabbath, a
"which no work is done. Jews respect the teachings in the Torah on food
20 not eat prohibited foods.

= OL.

Key words
Judaism commandments

repent scribe

storical background

5 the founder of Judaism as the Jews trace their history back to him. He
=s=n by God and told to move from Ur to Canaan. Canaan is the land that
=n 70 Abraham and his descendants to dwell in. Judaism is a religion of Jews



--- Page 63 ---
who descend from Abraham through Isaac to Jacob. Jacob was the father of
twelve sons who make up the twelve tribes of the nation of Israel. The natio
Israelis named after Jacob's second name which he was given after wrestling

an angel all night. The Jews were disturbed in their history and at one time sta
in Egypt where they were later made slaves. When it was time for God to free
children he sent Moses to liberate and lead the children of Israel to Canaan #
promised land. While on their forty year long journey to Canaan, Moses was fe]
the Ten Commandments by God on Mount Sinai. Commandments are divine r

and they need to be observed. When the Jews finally got to Canaan, with Jos
as their leader, they displaced many tribes and groups which lived in Canaan.

Activity 1

1. Research on Jewish ancestors, Jacob and Abraham.
2. Draw a picture of Moses on Mount Sinai receiving the ten commandmen

Exercise 1

Who is the founder of Judaism?
How long was the journey from Egypt to the promised land?
Who is the great ancestor of the Israelites?

The twelve tribes of Israel come from the sons of _

Who led the Israelites after Moses?

What did God give to Moses on Mount Sinai?

What is the name of the promised land?

NOOO ALN ~

8B. Ceremonies/festivals

The Jewish year is made up of several
festivals and ceremonies. The Jewish year
starts in September or October. New
Year's day is called Rosh Hashanah which
marks the beginning of the year. During
the Rosh Hashanah festival the Jews
remember God's creation and judgment
of the world. A ram's horn or Shofar is
blown in the synagogue to remind people
to return to God. This is followed by ten
days of self examination and people are
encouraged to repent. To repent means
to feel orexpresssincere regret orremorse
about one's wrong doing or sins. As a
sign of good wishes for others, the Jews
dip apples into honey and eat. The other



--- Page 64 ---
ne father of ier ant event is the Atonement/Yom

. The nation which is considered the holiest
wrestling i Judaism. This comes ten days after
ne time sta » =ashanah. On this day the Jews

fast and make public confessions
=r ans. The worshipers fast for twenty
ours during atonement and spend
wile day in the synagogue while
a white robes as a symbol of

God to free
) Canaan t
pses was giv
ire divine ru
In, with Jos
n Canaan.

Soys after the Day of Atonement
celebrate the feast of the |
wacles (Sukkot/Sucocoth) which
Sor a week. This is a harvest festival
gn They thank God for providing them
food, water, light/warmth, among
#= during their forty year journey

Egypt.

wa Passover/ Pesach the Jews remember and celebrate their deliverance from
= in Egypt. The Jews prepare a special meal and sing songs while they retell
woumey from Egypt. The Jews eat unleaven bread/matzah during Passover,
m=minds them of the bread the Jewish slaves ate in Egypt. This is also called the
& of unleavened bread.

mandmen

During which month/s of the year do Jews celebrate New Year?
What do Jews remember during Passover?
Which festival marks the harvests in Judaism?
Why is the ram's horn blown in the synagogue during atonement?

What kind of bread is eaten during Passover?

Which is the holiest day in Judaism?

2: which feast do the Jews celebrate God's creation and judgment of the
world?

=ow many days are between atonement and Sukkot?



--- Page 65 ---
8C. Artefacts and attire

Torah scroll

Tallit

Artefacts and attire in Judaism

Every Jewish family is expected to keep and use each of the following religi
materials; the Torah, the Menorah, the Mezuzah, the Yad, the star of David @
the Dreide. The Torah scroll carries the first five books of the Hebrew Bible
contain the law. The star of David is the symbol of Judaism while the Mezuzah is
sacred scroll inscribed with the prayers from the Torah. The Menorah is the se
branded candle stand. The dreidel is a four sided top used in a game pla
during Hanukkah. Hanukkah is a Jew festival for remembering the reope
of the temple. The yad is a pointer used when reading the Torah scroll. Whe
prayer and on special days, Jewish men put on a prayer shawl called the Ta
Men also put on a kippah on their heads during prayer and on any other da

Activity 3

1. Research on artefacts and attire in Judaism.
2. Listen as a resource person talks about artefacts and attire in Judaism.
3. Draw the symbol of Judaism.

Exercise 3

. The seven branched candle stand used as a symbol of the temple is calle;

What is used as a pointer to read the Torah scroll?

Which festival is for commemorating the reopening of the temple?
On what sacred scroll are the Torah prayers written?

What is the symbol of Judaism?

Oh OWOD



--- Page 66 ---


--- Page 67 ---
in the synagogue. Jews are taught not to serve other gods besides God, no

kill and not to commit adultery. These teachings are found as laws in the b

of Exodus 20. Every Jewish man is taught to pray three times a day, that is

the morning, in the afternoon and in the evening. Praying can be done in

home, or in the synagogue. Jews also teach that marriage is a holy union.
| Jewish woman has a duty to ensure that all food eaten in the home is clean ¢
is according to the Jewish food law. By so doing, she keeps the religious puri
a Jewish home. One of the most important teachings of the Jewish religion is
keep the Sabbath holy by not doing any work.

Activity 5

1. List the five books of the Pentateuch.
2. Find out the other duties of a Jewish woman.
3. Research the key teachings in Judaism.

Exercise 5

What is the Holy day for the Jews?

Where should Jewish men read the Torah?

How many times are Jewish men taught to pray?

What is the Jewish name for God?

Do Jews believe in life after death?

How do Jewish women keep the religious purity of the home?
What is prohibited on a Sabbath?

State any two books found in the Torah.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Jewish children planting trees



--- Page 68 ---
God, notlEaism teaches that “The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof, the world
‘in the bole those who dwell therein; (Psalm 24:1). The Jews believe in the protection
wy, that isk Ne earth. Such concern shows the important respect the Jews have for the
done in f@¥ronment. The Jews regard the land as a primary partner of their covenant
ly union. God. In the Torah, in the book of Genesis, God gave the land and all that is
is clean of" © man. God then instructed man fo take good care of everything on earth.
lous purity Fe Jews believe that since they were given land by Yahweh they have to take
religion isg#ed care of it. The Jews preserve environmental species such as old trees. To
| x= children grow with a sense of environmental protection, the Jews undertake
=Hoor lessons. The Jews respect the earth by planting trees during special days

- as the New Year as a way of reforestation. The Jews practice environmentally
=ndly approaches such as conserving the indigenous species and protection of
imals. They use environmental products sustainably so as to conserve plants
animal species found in the environment. Jews also don't believe in selling
=r because they say water is the source of life. Because of this, some Jewish
~=5 in Harare offer borehole water for free.

Listen as a resource person talks about the relationship between the Jews
and the environment.

2=search more on the Jews’ water belief. Can it be used as a solution to
water crisis?

2=search on the tree planting day in Zimbabwe. How effective has it beenin
teaching people to be environmentally friendly? Present your research in

class.

arcise 6

“ow do Jews make their children develop a deeper understanding of the
environment?

what environmental activity do Jews do on New Year for the trees?
what was man asked to do with all creation in the book of Genesis?
=ow do Jews show care for indigenous plants?

§  =ws respect all that is on earth because it belongsto

when do Jews do reforestation?

why do Jews protect the first fruits?

what two environmental species are protected by the Jews?

Food laws in Judaism

s believe that physical cleanliness and food cleanliness lead to spiritual purity.
person eats unclean food he or she becomes unclean. In the Jewish home,
s woman's duty to make sure that all food is clean according to Jewish food
seat and dairy products are not supposed fo be served together at the

meal.
MN



--- Page 69 ---
Kosher Non Kosher

brisket

Kosher and non-kosher parts of an ox

Jews only eat certain kinds of meat as listed in the book of Leviticus 1
Deuteronomy 14. The type and preparation is called kosher. This means
is according to Jewish law. The Jews may eat lamb, beef and chicken.
animals should be slaughtered by a trained and ordained person called a sh
The trained shochet makes sure the blood drains quickly from the body
slaughtered animal and also ensures that there is minimum pain. After the ¢
has been properly slaughtered, the remaining blood is removed by soakir
meat in cold and salted water. The Jews do not eat animal blood inrememb

of the blood used to show Jewish houses to God during the plague of tt
born in Egypt. God would Pass over any house marked with animal blooc
i i sh house. The Jews are forbidden from eating food st.
pork which does not have split hooves and shell fish that does not have s

1. Make a list of animals considered unclean by the Jews.
2. Write an account of the Passover as it happened in Egypt (Exodus 12 &
3. Research and present on how an animal is slaughtered by a shochet.



--- Page 70 ---
Which two food types should not be served on the same table?
whom do Jews thank before eating their food?

wnat two food types are considered unclean in Judaism?
Who is supposed fo slaughter animals for meat in Judaism?
“ow is the remaining blood of a slaughtered animal removed from the meat
in Judaism?

Who ensures that Kosher is observed in a Jewish home?

‘Why are Jews forbidden from eating animal blood?

what do Jews liken their table to during meal times?

ge mmary

4aism is the oldest religion originating in ancient Israel and Judea.
The founder of Judaism is Abraham.

ish year starts in September or October and their New Year's day is called
®osh Hashanah.

Tov celebrate Sukkot which is a feast to thank God after harvest.

= Jews use the Torah, Menorah, Yad, the star of David and the Dreidel as
heir religious materials.

Reigious practitionersin Judaism include priests, prophets, rabbis and scribes.
They believe in the existence of one God called Yaweh, who is the Creator.
=y use the Torah as their holy book.

respect the earth by planting trees as a way of restoration.

cus 11 a
leans that
ken. Thet
d a shoche
pody of t

[ihe ani

soaking t
Bembrond - the reconciliation of God.
t of the fir — a skullcap worn by Orthodox male Jews.

blood as
»od such @

— a seven-lamp Hebrew lampstand made of gold.
— a small material with handwritten Hebrew words.

digs - that has been forbidden; banned.
a prayer ¢ — the process of replanting trees in an area.

— bread made without yeast or other raising agent.



--- Page 71 ---
Multiple c choice questions

1. Who is the founder of Judaism?

A. Adam B. Moses C. Jacob D. Abraham
2. Whose sons make up Israel's twelve tribes?

A. Abraham B. Moses C. Jacob D. Isaac
3. The festival of the Jewish new year is celebrated i in___

A. September and August B. October and N November

C. September and October D. November and December
4. What is another name for a Jewish prayer shawl?

A. Kippah B. Torah C. Tallit D. Menorah
5. Which of these is a symbol of Judaism?

A. The kippah B. The Star of David

C. The tallit D. The menorah
6. A____isresponsible for writing, teaching and explaining the law in Judais

A. "scribe B. rabbai C. prophet D. priest
7. Where is the Torah read to Jewish men?

A. Inthe church B. Shrine

C. Synagogue D. Kitchen

8. Jews believe they should take good care of the environment which the
were given by

A. Moses B. Yahweh B. Isaac D. Jacob
9. Jews do not eat meat from animals without ___

A. hooves B. tongues C. split hoc hooves D. horns
10. State one book from the Torah which gives food laws for the Jews.

A. The Tanakh B. Leviticus C. Exodus D. Genesis

Structured questions

List three Jewish artefacts you learnt about in the unit.
. What is the use of a yad?
. The Jewish year is made up of several ____ and

1
2
3
4. What is blown in the synagogue to remind | people to return to God?
5. Moses was given __ on Mount Sinai.
6
7
8

List three ceremonies in Judaism.
What is the use of the Torah scroll?
. State four religious practitioners in Judaism.
9. What is the role of a rabbi in Judaism?
10. What does Judaism teach about the environment?



--- Page 72 ---
fin Judais
Hj

‘which th

a?

9: Islam

njectives

he end of the unit you should be able to:

‘=arate the historical background of Islam

‘sate the two main groups found in Islam

state key teachings in Islam

=xplain key teachings in Islam

sate ceremonies and festivals in Islam

me religious artefacts in Islam

@escribe religious attire in Islam

3entify religious practitioners in Islam

ate the roles performed by the religious practitioners in Islam
ggest Islamic ways of conserving the environment

ify the need for good use of the environment in Islam
ist forbidden foods in Islam

=plain the significance of halaal.

tkground

& a religion founded by the Islamic prophet Muhammad who was a great
Sous and political individual. Islam is spread worldwide but it is dominant in
. A%ica, the Middle East and South Asia. Within Islam there are two main
2 which are Sunni and Shia. The Islamic Supreme Being is called Allah and
S=achings are from the Quran which was revealed fo Muhammad by Allah.
Blowers of Islam are called Muslims/Moslems. Islamic holy days and festivals
2= Ramadan. Muslims are strict observers of Halaal which specifies how
2s should be slaughtered and how the meat should be handled to keep it
smuslims believe that everything on earth was created for a purpose and
J be protected, preserved and developed.

Historical background

der of Islam is Muhammad. He was born in Mecca in 570AD and lost his
when he was very young and experienced the hard life of growing up as
shan. Muhammad grew up staying with his grandfather and later stayed
== uncle. At the age of 25 he was employed to lead Khadija's business of
ors. He later married Khadija. Muhammad liked to fast and pray alone.
#= believe that one night when Muhammad was fasting on the Hira mountain
po=' Gabriel appeared to him and this marked the start of many messages
convinced Muhammad that this was Allah speaking to him.

# wos started by Muhammad in about 610 AD. The Muslims believe that Allah
=5 himself to Muhammad through several messages which were later put


--- Page 73 ---
journey the Hegira (the movement of Muham
fo Meding to avoid Persecution). The Hegira

Religion of Islam became well formed qt Medi
Muhammag of Worshipping

mad and his followers from Me
marks the beginning of Islg
Na. Moslems follow the examp

.» alms giving and fasting. Muham

ment do we get the sayings and actions of
Muhammaqg?
Why is the Hegira importa

6 ntin the history of Islam?
7. Which three important th;
ad?

ngs do Moslems Copy and practice from
8. Which are the two main

9B. Key teachings

Moslems teach that Allah is the Supreme Being. Allah
ran Surah 59:23 teaches that Allah js:

e

Giver of peace
* Keeper of faith * Guardian

groups of Islam?

is the only God ang thers



--- Page 74 ---
fo convey thé
there is only o
€hings in Mec
lis great religia
fers from Mec

E mighty one * The all powerful
most high

#=aches that Allah's deeds are also his names. Allah is referred to by ninety-
ames. The most common of these include:

ng of Islam. = merciful * The compassionate
' the example = forgiver * The clement

id became ve E generous * The affectionate
main sources B king

ah. The Sun

} ad is considered the prophet of Allah by Moslems. Islam teaches people
rompanions d

Dw the prophet Muhammad as he is a true messenger of Allah.
for Shi'at Ali
due to differe
¢ that Abu Bo
ior, also kno
lat Ali, who
known as Sh
guided by t

BS “=aches that a person is a worshiper and servant of God. Moslems are
otal submission to Allah. Social, political and religious lives are all gifts from
The word Muslim means a person who lives his everyday life according to
God) will. Islam means total submission to God. The Quran views the body
$ 50wt as one thing and cannot be separated. Islam emphasises the Sunnah
= shows the way prophet Muhammad lived his life.

= 2550 emphasises that good Moslems should confess their faith. This is the first

of slam and is called Shahadanh, meaning commitment to Allah and fellow
Bnet Muhammad.

= Oso teaches that there are fixed
£ of prayer and that it should be
= five times a day. Each time
#=ms pray, they must kneel with
= down on a prayer mat facing
oly City of Mecca. The prayer is
B= offer spiritual washing, this is at
5. midday, mid afternoon, sunset

might. Prayer is the second pillar

ite their

ons of also teaches its followers to

=. Alms giving is the third pillar of
Moslems are encouraged to
r= their wealth with the poor and ~~ Muslim man praying

E = called Zakat. Moslems are also

=ouraged to fast and this is usually done during the month of Ramadan which
*= holy month. Fasting is therefore the fourth pillar of Islam. Moslems are taught
70 eat or drink during daylight hours for the whole month of Ramadan. The last

or in Islam is that of pilgrimage. They believe that a Muslim should go to Mecca
worship Allah at least once in their lives,

3

| and there



--- Page 75 ---
Activity 2

| 1. Draw a Muslim during prayer time on his prayer mat wearing his white ga
2. Make cuttings of Moslems and make a chart.

Exercise 2

What does the word Moslem mean?

Islam means total to God.

What is the first pillar of Islam?

How many pillars make up Islam?

How many times should a Moslem pray everyday?

Why do Moslems pray facing Mecca?

What is the name given to the Moslem month of fasting?

NOOO AWN —~

9C. Ceremonies and festivals

Islam has ceremonies and festivals which help the Moslems remember, celeb
and praise Allah for various things they get from him. Some of the festivals incl
Hajj, Eid-al-fitr, Eid-al-adha, Hira and Ramadan.

a

¥

Moslems are taught that once in a person's life time they must take a holy journg
to Mecca the holy city. This journey or pilgrimage is called Hajj. This is the fifth pil
of Islam. In Mecca, Moslems visit the Kaaba which was built by Abraham helpé
by his son Ishmael. This is considered the most holy of holy places for Moslems.


--- Page 76 ---
# f=stival of Ramadan is for a whole month when Moslems do not eat or drink
hing during day light. This is a festival of fasting. Moslems also celebrate Rabi
ion is a whole month of celebrating the birth of Prophet Mohammad and his
he Hijra marks the holy journey Muhammad took from Mecca to Medina. The
pi-fitr is a festival where Moslems celebrate the end of the fasting month of
madan. In this ceremony, gifts are given to children and the poor. Moslems also
= a four-day celebration all over the world to mark the end of the pilgrimage
=cca. In this festival, animals are sacrificed and the meat is given to the poor.

festival is called Eid-al-adha. It is the second most important festival in the
sem calendar. Eid-al-adha is a festival that remembers Abraham's willingness
sacrifice his son when God ordered him to. Moslems sacrifice a sheep and
soe if into three parts amongst family, friends and the poor.

Ss white garb

. Pay attention as a resource person explains about the festivals in Islam and
now each festival is done or performed.

List two festivals in Islam.

Match the festival with its meaning:

er, celebrat
fivals includ

Joyful celebration to end month of fasting
The month of the pilgrimage
Month of fasting

Celebrating Muhammad's journey from Mecca to
Medina

Celebrating Muhammad's birth

~xercise 3

State two festivals which benefit the poor.
When is Muhammad's birth celebrated?
What is Ramadan?

How long does Ramadan last?

Which festival is done to remember Muhamad's journey to Medina?
In which ceremony are gifts given to children and the poor?

What is a pilgrimage?

oly journcfil@® What is sacrificed during Eid-al-adha?

e fifth pilla = Who built the Kaaba?

om helped
Dslems.



--- Page 77 ---
9D. Artefacts and attire

The Muslim Holy book is the Quran, which
is read from right to left ang should not be
left open. Itis wrapped in a clean cloth and
kept on a high place with nothing on top of
it. The Muslims wash their hands and cover
their heads before reading the Quran.

The Quran js believed to contain Allah's
word to his people. Only the purified Muslims
should touch the Quran. Islamic women
are expected to cover their heads before
touching the Quran. The Holy sacred Quran
has a wooden stang where it is placed Quran stand
when they are reading it. The Stand is re
Quran should not be put on the floor.

Islamic attire

There are standards of dressing for both
men and women in Islam. Women are not
allowed to wear clothes that imitate men's
clothing, like shirts and ties. Women's

garded as a throne. To show respect

wear a khimar, this is q cloth that covers
the head, neck and bosom. In addition, the women should also wear g jilbab,
is a garment that covers the entire body.

Islamic men are SUpposed to cover their awrah, this is the part from the ng
down to the knee

s. The men are also expected to cover their shoulder and #
torso. The Islamic men are forbidden from wearing gold and silk. When weg

their clothes, men should ensure that they are above the ankle so that they do
get dirt from the ground.

Itis important to note that the Islamic dress
prayer, even if one is praying alone.

Activity 4

code should always be followed du



--- Page 78 ---
The Islamic holy books
Where is the Quran placed when it is being read?
What is a hijab?
=ow is the Quran read?
wnat do Islamic women wear to cover their heads?
What do Islamic men wear on their heads during prayer?
What are Islamic men forbidden to wear?
What do Islamic women use the Khimar for?

Religious practitioners

=n people are given different roles in
Some of the roles include leading
= In prayer, interpreting the Quran,
f=ng the Quran and calling others for
= mes. Examples of these practitioners
= Imam, Muezzin, Ulama and the
2a. The Imam is the male prayer/
Bp leader. Imams are also community
== and they provide religious
=. An Imam also teaches every

f respect,

Bs have a strict prayer timetable. To

sure that every Moslem goes to
& "ne Muezzin'staskis fo callpeople to
& of the correct times by shouting/
3. The Muezzin is the servant in a
Muezzins are chosen for their
§ character. A Muezzin stands at the
sce of the mosque to call people to
¥ To do this, the Muezzin calls facing
dgrections, North, South, East and

ajilbab, tA

n the na
der and th
en weari
they do ne

a or doctor of the law has the role
soreting the Muslim law also known as
ra. The Ulama upholds the Islamic
or and practices. The Ulama is found
groups of Islam which are the Sunni
¥2 communities.

wed duri

€ in Islam.

Eo v = practitioner is a Mujahid. A Mujahid is also a Muslim teacher and has the
ou

ave religious ruling and legal decisions based on his authority. The Mujahid
=a* authority in Islam. His other work is to analyse the Quran.



--- Page 79 ---


--- Page 80 ---
Ms and tho

= Muslims view the whole earth as a big.

¥at is promised to all those who show kindness to all living creatures?

222 who fail to make a good relationship with the environment also fail to
"axe a good relationship with

ich Islamic Holy book mentions the need for good environmental care?

‘amatise it,
fe up of yo

EE ——

should deserts, fields and forests be respected by Muslims?
ccording fo Islam, how can complete faith be realised?
af can make a person a stranger to God and the environment?
atkind of returns will people get if they take good care of the environment?
Food laws
ms are forbidden from eating meat from animals that die on their own, pork,
Bs are ‘Sedicated fo other gods and blood. The Quran teaches Muslims about what
I and what not fo eat. Meat from a pig is considered unclean because of the
ings found in Leviticus, Deuteronomy and Isaiah.

s practice halaal which means that before slaughtering an animal they
tell her sto fhe name of Allah who is the provider. They use sharp knives so that there
fore, all t fy Sitle pain felt by the animal. Blood is believed to carry germs so draining it
PE call s leaving the meat free of germs. Blood is also believed to carry bacteria,
! h. To she Chive agents and waste. This makes the meat less healthy and less tasty if blood
I Gils BF drained. Muslims buy their halaal food from supermarkets that sell them. They
4 can of just buy from anywhere.

which we ~fivity 7
icies as the Find out from Muslims the food laws practiced in Islam.
vironment - Explain the slaughtering process in Islam. Starting with dedication of the
with naty animal to Allah.
5 a strange Find the books that forbid eating certain animals. List them and write down
fhe verses that say it.

Research on the availability of halaal products in Zimbabwe. If possible
bring a halaal packaging to class.

followe
al specie
indness

for sount
gement ¢
vironmer

-xercise 7

Which animal is considered unclean and not to be eaten?

What is halaal?

Why should Muslims not eat blood?

What do Muslims do before slaughtering an animal?

. Why is it forbidden to eat meat from an animal that dies on its own?

Very sharp knives are used when slaughtering animals in Islam. [True/False]



--- Page 81 ---
Summary

* Muslims have different artefacts which they use in their religious practic
ceremonies and rituals.

* The dress code should be observed whenever the Muslims are praying.

* The Quran is treated with high respect and care as Muslims regard it as sacs

and holy.

* The Islamic women are expected to cover as much of their body as possi
when in public.

* The Quran is read from right to left.

* Muslims do not buy from anywhere. They strictly eat halaal products.

Glossary

Caliph the chief Muslim civil and religious ruler, regarded as t
successor of Muhammad.

Torso the part of the human body that does not include the heat
arms or legs.

Transparent something that you can see through is said to be fransparer
for example, a glass window pane.

Wrapped covered.

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

1. Muhammad grew up as an ____ since he had lost both parents.

A. muslim B. orphan C. founder D. practitioner
2. Two main groups in Islam are.

A. Medina And Mecca B. Kaba And Allah

C. Sunni And Shia D. Kadhija And Hegira
3. Muslims believe in Allah who is the.

A. Creator B. Practitioner C. Hegira D. Quran
4. Muslims do not eat or drink during the day on the festival of _

A. Eid-alfitr B. Haj C. Ramadan D. Laila Al Qadr
S. Muslims place the Quranon a when itis being read.

A. Rael/Quran stand B. prayer Mat

C. shelf D. cloth
6. The Muslim who interprets the Quran is the

A. Ulama B. Mujahid C. Muezzn D. Imam

7. To show great respect of God's creation, Muslims view the whole earth a
all things in it as a big .
A. world B. city

C. universe D. mosque



--- Page 82 ---
5 practice

Eo
t as sacref

as possibl

The Islamic way of handling food to keep it clean is called .
A. slaughtering B. halaal

~ C. purity D. forbidding

Muslims are expected to always handle the Quran with .
A. care B. respect

~ C. covered faces D. closed
2. The religious flight made by Muhammad from Mecca to Medina in 622 AD is

the .
A. pilgrim B. Shia C. hijra D. fight

Structured questions

In which city was Islam started?
. Where was Muhammad buried?
. Why should Muslims follow their dress code?
. What is the use of the prayer beads in Islam?
~ What is the role of a Muja-hid in Islam?
. Why do Muslims refrain from eating pork?

Who leads prayer in Islam?

. Why do Muslims respect all living things?

End of term two assessment

EEE. —

er 1: Thr 30 minutes
50 marks
Multiple choice questions

The two famous spirit mediums in the second war of liberation are .

~ A. Murenga and Tobela B. Malandela and Kaguvi
~ C. Nehanda and Kaguvi D. Mutapa and Mafamba
. The national ancestors are believed to have the freedom fighters in the

war of liberation.
A. protected and guided B. betrayed
C. rebelled against D. fed

- During which ceremony do the indigenous people bring the family spirit

home?

A. Mukwerera B. Thanksgiving

C. Kurova guva/umbuyiso D. Rainmaking

A spirit medium will wear ____ on the head during ceremonies.

A. head dress/gear B. spear

C. beads D. hat

People who are related are joined by the same.

A. names B. surnames C. totems D. chiefs



--- Page 83 ---
20.

21.

22.

Desired talents from ancestors include all these except .

A. healing B. hunting C. foretelling D. witchcraft
The oneness of the African people is in the statement.
A. reviving ancestors B. oneness with nature
C. lam because you are D. ancestors are revered
Indigenous people believe in ____ sacred places.
A. disturbing B. destroying C. ignoring D. respecting
The ____ have a duty to protect the land and all that is in it.
A. spirit mediums B. traditional leaders
C. healers D. shrines
. To mark the growth from childhood to adulthood, boys and girls go thr
A. initiation B. dancing competitions
C. tests D. shrines
. The indigenous people believe in life
A. on earth B. afterdeath C. and shrines D. C
. Sacred pools are believed to have ____ staying in them.
A. mermaids B. healers C. many fish D. no fish
. The Quran is believed to be a collection of messages from
A. Allah B. Mecca C. Elders D. the Mosque
. Islamic women wear ____ to cover their faces.
A. Kippah B. Nigab C. Awrah D. lJilbab
. All these are Islamic festivals except.
A. Hira B. Laila AlBar C. Ramadan D. Eid-al-fitr
. Islamic women should cover their ____ as much as possible.
A. face B. whole body
C. legs only D. chest and knees
.Inlslam, the ____ calls people to prayer.
A. Ulama B. Imam C. Mujahid D. Muezzin
. Living in harmony with nature enables one to have a good relationship
A. plants B. Allah C. Shia D. angel
- Which artefact enables Muslims to pray on a clean surface.
A. prayer mat B. prayer hat
C. Quran stand D. clean cloth
Taking ____ care of the environment ensures good life for people.
A. No B. good C. extra D. all

Muslims do not eat.

A. any meat

B. salty meat

C. meat from animals with no split hooves and fish without scales
D. vegetables

Muslims believe in keeping their bodies clean for religious.

A. sacrifice B. purity C. prayers D. faith



--- Page 84 ---
Whom did Muhammad work for before marrying her?
A. Fatima B. Kadhija C. Sunna D. Shiite
slam is about all these except.
A. behavior and character B. belief and law
~ C. worship and work D. living and eating
slam considers all humans as.
A. equdl B. divided C. unequal D. notimportant
How many disciples did Jesus choose in his ministry?
A. Twelve B. Eleven C. Seventy D. Ten
~ An ordinary life story with the intention to teach a moral or heavenly lesson is
calleda__
A. ceremony B. festival C. passion D. parable
Christians celebrate Jesus’ birth on ____ day.
A. Easter B. Christmas C. Good Friday D. Pentecost
f. Jesus’ __ is celebrated during Easter.
A. resurrection B. preaching C. birth D. healing
The ___ is a symbol that reminds Christians of their salvation.
B. cross C. bible D. anointing oil
Empire had Christianity as its main religion.
~ A. Oftoman B. Roman C. Chinese D. British
A Christian church leader who has priests and pastors below him is called

A. a pastor B. anevangelist C. a bishop D. an apostle
* The ___ are responsible for the spreading of the gospel to new converts.
A. evangelists B. prophets C. messengers D. medicine men
£ How many Gods do Christians believe in?
A. Three B. Twelve C. One D. Two
=. God the Father, Jesus the Son and the Holy Spirit make up the __ in
Christianity.
A. church B. trinity
C. new Testament D. bible
In which book does God entrust the environment to people?
A. Leviticus B. Isaiah C. Genesis D. Revelation
7. Which food is prohibited by some Christian groups and denominations?
A. Juice B. Pork C. Vegetables D. Beef
3. The book of __ prohibits people from eating meat such as pork, bacon,
ostrich, craw fish and lobster.
A. Judges B. Deuteronomy C. Samuel D. Torah
7. Who is considered as the founder of Judaism?
A. Paul B. Mohammed C. Jesus D. Abraham
2. The first part of the Jewish Bible, the Tanakh, is called the
A. Abraham B. Neviium C. Torah D. Isaiah
£1. The Jews get the name Israelites from second name Israel.
A. Jesus’ B. Jehova's C. Jacob's D. Yahweh's



--- Page 85 ---
42 The Jews remember their liberation from slavery in Egypt during .

A. Passover B. Pentecost C. Ramadan D. Christmas
43. The new year in Judaism is in the months of ___.

A. January and February B. May and June

C. September and October D. December and January
44. The Jewish prayer shawl used during morning prayerisa _.

A. Minora B. Scarf C. Tallit D. Tai-chi
45. The prayer cap for all Jewish menis called a ___.

A. Star of David B. Kippah C. Torah D. Scroll
46. The is the teacher and interpreter of the Torah.

A. rabbi B. prophet C. scribe D. priest
47.The is also called the Pentateuch.

A. Quran B. Neviium C. Bible D. Torah
48. Jews the environment because they consider it a gift from God.

A. misuse B. conserve C. degrade D. destroy
49. play avery big role in keeping the home and the right foods for a Jewis

family.

A. Kosher B. Prophets C. Jewish women D. Men

50. Blessed are the ____.

meek for they shall inherit the earth
B. wise for they shall live long

C. holy

D. children for they shall live long

Structured questions

>

Paper 2: Thr 30mins
Section A 30 marks
Answer all the questions in this section.

1. a) Indigenous people view the ancestors as the living ____. [1¥
b) What is a totem? [
c) What does a family tree show? [13
d) Name any four totems used in Zimbabwe. [1%

e) Which indigenous name for the Supreme Being shows that he is the
creator of people?

2. a) Which indigenous artefact was a sign of defense for the family? [1
b) What do we call sacred places where rituals or ceremonies are

performed? 1}
c) The ancestral spirit speaks to people through a person called a A
d) Which spirit medium was hung on a free in Harare during the first

Chimurenga? m

e) Why are wooden plates used for religious and family functions? [1

3. a) What two artefacts are used during indigenous religious functions? [1]
b) Which animal's tail is used in religious events? mn

c) Give an example of one Indigenous Religion ceremony? Mm



--- Page 86 ---
What is the use of divining bones?
4. a) How are lineages formed? 1}
b) What is a gourd used for in Indigenous Religion? [1]
c) What work does an inyanga/n’'anga do? 1}!
d) Where do we find the sacred Chirorodziva pool? [1]
e) Name one artefact in Indigenous religion? [1]
5. a) What can happen to people who misbehave in sacred places? m
b) What is prohibited on an indigenous day of rest? Mm
c) Inindigenous communities, who are not supposed fo marry each
other? [
what materials are used to make a traditional leader's head gear? [2]

Section B

There are six questions in this section. Answer any FOUR questions.
1. a) Name one relative Muhammad stayed with after the death of his

wish | parents? [1]
b) What forced Muhammad to flee from Mecca to Medina in 622 AD? [1]

c) Which are the two main groups in Islam? [2]

d) Where should Muslims face when they are praying? [1]

2. a) Where should the Quran be placed when it is not being read? [nl

b) The Quran is regarded sacred as it contains massages from ___ . [2]

c) In Islam, who is supposed to cover much of their body including the

face? A}

d) What kind of a relationship with nature should Muslims keep? [1]
a) Jesuswasbornon____ day. [1]
b) Who baptised Jesus? [1]
c) Where was Jesus baptised? 1}!
d) On what day was Jesus crucified? Rl
e) State one Christian artefact. [1]
a) Where is wine kept during Christian religious ceremonies? [1]
b) Who wears a collar in Christianity? [1]
c) Who leads celebration ceremonies in Christianity? [1]
d) Who make up the trinity in Christianity? [3]
e) Are there any prohibited foods in Christianity? [1]
a) To whom do Jews trace their origins? [1]
b) In which nation were Jews made slaves? [1]
c) Who led the children of Israel out of Egypt? [1]
d) What is remembered by the Jews af Passover? [M
e) On which part of the body do Jewish men wear the Kippah? [1]
a) What is the work of the Rabbi in Judaism? [1
b) How many books make up the Torah? [1]
c) Which two books of the Pentateuch prohibit the eating of pork and
certain sea foods?
What do Jews call the trained slaughterer of animals in Judaism?



--- Page 87 ---
Topic Morals and Values

=

Introduction

People's behaviour is guided by morals and values that determine whether any:
behaviour is right or wrong. Morals are standards of behaviour, they are principles:
of right and wrong. Whereas values are standards that we regard as worthwhile:
and desirable. As individuals, we are expected to be taught morals by our families,
friends, religion, education and own experiences as we grow. The way we measure
how good we are to others is determined by how our behaviour affects others.
The way we behave influences how much peace or conflict we can experience
as a society. Families should try and control the tempers of their children so that
they can be tolerant and learn to handle conflicts peacefully.



--- Page 88 ---
Objectives rin i
MBRSZHC Pry

By the end of the unit you should be able to:

. identify good and bad morals 17 JAN 2019
. explain the right fo belong to a religion ; See oct
. identify responsibilities of belonging to a religion Nba Rea i

. state rights and responsibilities at school and community
. identify ways of treating others fairly

. list basic children's rights and responsibilities

. explain the role of religion in promoting children’s rights.

Background

#35 we grow up in families we develop our characters, attitudes and how we
see or treat others. Society wants individuals who have good manners, are
Fustworthy and dependable. Religion follows a strong system of teachings that
am to develop individuals with acceptable behaviour and are helpful in society.
¥ adults in a community show respect for each other and have good manners
Me children who are growing up will learn good behaviour and attitudes. Such
2 society is likely to have more peace. The Zimbabwean constitution provides
for the respect for children’s rights. It is important for children to be aware of the
expected behaviour as well as their rights and their responsibilities at home, school
ond in the community.

Key words
morals values responsibilities rights community

10A. Right and wrong

any

fiples Rutendo’s family

while ®utendo's father is a drunkard and the mother, Tagwirei, is also known for being
ilies, sharp at the borehole and community gatherings. Rutendo and her young
asure orother and two sisters have taken after their parents and are known for scolding,
fhers. oullying others at school and in the community. At school Rutendo and her other

ence

thot Tree siblings are known for stealing their classmates, provisions, not doing their
}

schoolwork and running away from school. They are very rude to their teachers
ond elders in the community. Surprisingly, Rutendo's youngest sister Chipo who
stays with their grandmother has an admirable character. Chipo is known to be
honest, hardworking, kind and friendly to other children. In the community, Chipo
& known for respecting and helping adults and those in need. Chipo has respect

for other people's possessions.



--- Page 89 ---
|
Bi
}
|

see the table below
Bad values/ | ggects to the

Good values/
aftitudes/ Ee affitudes/ Ee ont
behaviour y behaviour y
Respect Order, peace Harm Disturbance, fear
Peace, : .
Love cooperation Bullying Injury. hatred, fear
: Support, k .
Trustworthiness safety Stealing Loss of possessions
Hardworking SUCCESS: Laziness Jealousy, envy
cooperation
Justice Peace, harmony Violence Unrest, injury, fear
Rude Fear, hatred

Tolerance Peace, harmony

Kindness Support

Peace making lien Careless Losses, danger

Hard hearted Aloofness, grudges

Injustice Unfairness

Development

Responsibility

Activity 1
1. Discuss the table ab

the community.
5 Research and find out the good morals and values your society wants.

3. In groups, write one column of expected good behaviour at school and
one of unwanted behaviour, giving reasons for each.
4. List proverbs in your language which show that children

parents.

with the impact ©

ove and add more values together

learn from their

Exercise 1

Item
Children learn values from their pare

nis.

Respect is an important part of a good society.

All parents teach good values.
Families, religions and communities quarrel on values.

There are no bullies at school and in communities.

won WN



--- Page 90 ---
A community that respects other's possessions is
Schools want learners who are hardworking and
trustworthy.

All communities and societies teach against stealing.
Uncaring parents do not teach their children good
values and morals.

Good habits lead to good characters.

i=ligions teach morals and values
ond so people see it important to
elong to them. Families and
communities regard religions as
another learning place where both
adults and children's behaviour and
character will continue to be guided
line with expected teachings. All
=igions aim to teach purity and
Jnteousness based on good morals
dvalues. They are against any form
bad behaviour. The groups in
h religions are organised create

fs. soporfunities for people to teach,
and ourage, share and practice the
| =achings of their religions. Individuals
eir ave the freedom to choose the

=igion they would like to belong fo.

=mbers of a family can belong fo
SFerent religions and still live in harmony respecting their religious differences. The
soral teachings and values which are most similar among religions make it easy
+ individuals from different religions to get along well.

Christian woman and Muslim man

sere are also responsibilities that come with belonging to a religion. Different
=iqions have different ways of doing things. As you have leant in the previous
soics about the four main religions, the practitioners have different responsibilities
5 roles. The congregants also have different responsibilities. For example, it is
= women's duty to prepare halaal food in Islam. In Judaism, Kosher is important
> every follower and it is their responsibility to make sure they follow the rules on
what to eat and it's preparation. In Christianity it is every Christian's responsibility
“~ —elebrate Christmas and Easter. In Indigenous Religion, it is the spirit medium's
s=sponsibility to communicate with the ancestors. For all the religions, if is the



--- Page 91 ---
t other people, help the needy and do good even

followers’ responsibility torespec

to those who harm them. It is also their responsibility fo take care of nature anc .
treat it with respect as they are commanded fo do so in the different holy LOOKS -
or in the taboos passed down from generation to generation like in Indigenous »
Religion. 4
Activity 2 >
1. Write down your religion's main teachings and present them to your class.
2. Debate onif we should have different religions in families and communities. 1
3. Find out the personal benefits of belonging to a religion. -

|

Exercise 2 :

1. What is common among the teachings of different religions? -

0 Which two things do religions aim to teach? 4

ns manage to get

3. How do family members belonging to different religio
along well?

What is the responsibility of women in Islam?

How do individuals select religions they want to belong 10?
Whose responsibility is it to communicate with the ancestors in Indigenous

Religion?
_ Give one value any religion will teach.
Religious groups aim to teach and develop children’s and .

on»

co

10C. Rights and responsibilities in fairness
o families, communities and nations. Being fair fo others i
another. Schools and communities maintai
ommunities respect each other's

Fairness brings peace t
a sign of respect and love for one
peace because children and adults in those C
rights.
amilies, communities, nations and religions have rules ang
regulations that ensure that all people are treated fairly. The presence of rules anc
regulations, therefore, ensures that all people are protected. When individuals
respect and obey the agreed moral values then justice and peace prevail. A
community that leaves in harmony and with individuals who treat each other fair

usually develops better than communities that are not united.

ade up of different people, families and clans. The differen
different religions. However, they are all responsible for the:
ty. Every individual has the responsibility of helping the;
eighbour’s property. looking after the neighbour's
community is safe for everyone. When one sees
hbour's home it is their responsibility fo call the =

Schools, just like f

Communities are m
people are part of
harmony in the communi
needy, faking care of the n
children and making suré the
thieves coming out of the neig



--- Page 92 ---
€. When one sees a strange person walking around the neighbourhood, it
heir responsibility to alert the other families so that they are careful. When a

arent sees children in the community fighting, it is their responsibility to stop the
ght.

hen stopping fights at school or in the community it is important to treat the two
ariies fairly. Fairness is a very important tool of maintaining unity within a group
people. Fairness in school is when two students involved in a fight are punished
ually, regardless of who started the fight. Fairness is sharing school resources
= books equally amongst classmates. People are different and their differences

ould not be a window for treating them unfairly. The student in the wheelchair
an still play basketball and so can the one with albinism. Rights and responsibilities
Bve to be done in fairness. If all the students should clean the classroom then all
them should partake in that activity. The same goes with food and sharing of

. Activity 3

Invite the school head and kindly ask her/him to explain your school's values
and regulations.
. Discuss the values in the National School Pledge.

-xercise 3

I. School rules and regulations ensure that there is (fairness/litter).
= Rights and responsibilities have to be in ____(fairmess/force).
Every child in school should be treated — (fairly/differently) without
thers is preference.
Jintain It is every child's (privilege/right) __ to attend school.
sther's People in a community are responsible for the (harmony/rains) in the
community.
E ang Itis the children’s (responsibility/choice) to get to school on time.
kang - For peace and harmony to prevail in a community its members should

(respect and obey/disobey and quarrel).
During practical work, fairness is exercised by giving learners work that suits
their (ability/height).

fiduals
vail. A
ir fairly

0D. Children’s rights

lies, communities and nations are expected to work and provide for the
==ds of children so as to make them redlise. their rights. Some of the children’s
217s which the Constitution of Zimbabwe provides for are the right to education
ical protection, food, clothes, health care, identity and respect for human
=. Children in turn have responsibilities to fulfill such as helping with work at home.
= also their responsibility to wash their bodies and read their books.

ferent
or the
Ig the
bour's
Be sees
oll the



--- Page 93 ---
Children have responsibilities that are
taught to them by their families,
schools and religions. Responsibilities
can also be linked to their culture and
religion as they have different beliefs
and lifestyles. For example, in
Indigenous Religion, girls have to do
duties in the kitchen and boys have to
take care of livestock. Both boys and
girls are responsible for their school
work. Responsibilities help develop
morals and values.

Religions protect the rights of children,
encourage and respect the family as
an important structure in society that
ensures children are provided for. Religious teachings talk of treating and ensuring
that children grow up with the right values, morals and behaviour. Religion

encourage parents to treat their children well as they are the future.

TORS ST MR EN Be fad BY ew

Learners studyin

g and dis

cussing together

Some general rights applicable to children

The right to:

o life

« express opinions and fo be heard

+ protection from abuse or exploitation
« association with both parents

+ food, clothes and shelter

health care

education
protection from physical and or mental violence.

Activity 4

1. Get the Zimbabwean Constitution and find sections which refer to children’s
rights.

2. Divide your classinto

rights.
3. List the disadvantaged children's violated rights in your community.
4. In groups, list the advantages and disadvantages of children’s rights.

Present your findings in class.

two groups and debate on the importance of children’s



--- Page 94 ---
rng
ions

Exercise 4

. Who should uphold children’s rights?

. If children live on the streets, what rights have been violated?

. Which right should be fulfilled when children become ill?

. While children's rights should be fulfilled, the children should do their ___ as
well.

. What do religions teach about children's rights?
How should families treat their children?

. When children express their opinions what should parents do?
Religions teach parents to treat their children well as they are the ____.

Summary

We should be able to select good from bad morals.

Each one of us has the freedom of choice and association.

While individuals have rights they also have responsibilities to fulfill.
Parents should provide for their children and treat them well.
Religions encourage families and communities to treat children fairly.
Children should respect elders and work hard.

Glossary

Responsibilities — a duty or task one should fulfil.
Role — a part or duty that one should do in a situation.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. The of Zimbabwe provides for the rights of children and other people.

A. religion B. Bible C. police D. Constitution
2. ____ morals make a person good and helpful in a community.

A. Lack of B. Good C. Responsibility D. Children's
3. ___ morals disturb peace and harmony in societies.

A. Cheap B. Good C. Bad D. Many morals

' 4, Children should be ____ with one another at school.

A. fair B. rude C. uncaring D. copying
5. Rightsare for ____.

A. the chosen few B. therich

C. the poor D. every human being



--- Page 95 ---
. What are children supposed to fulfill?

. Children’s rights are meant to children.

A. abuse B. protect C. punish D. educate
Children have a ____ to help with work in the home.

A. responsibility B. punishment C. noreason D. choice
. Respect, love and unity are found ina ____ community.

A. working B. small C. confused D. peaceful
In all school activities learners should be ____ fairly.

A. assessed B. beaten C. tortured D. favoured

.____ are important to life and should be protected.
A. Rules B. Responsibilities
C. Trees D. Rights

Structured questions
. Write any three places where children are taught morals.

. Select any three rights children may not realise due to lack of parents’
support.

_ Children learning at one school should __ for each other. (care/ignore)

. Teaching of good manners to children will help to create a ____ community.
(caring and loving/careless and loving/caring and stubborn)

Children can show concern for each otherby ____ (competing/supporting/
quarreling with) those facing problems.



--- Page 96 ---
Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. state the causes of conflict at school and community
2. identify forms of conflict

3. give the meaning of conflict management

4. suggest ways of managing conflict.

Background

Conflict cannot be avoided in any group or pair of people. Families and
communities have been using ways of dealing with conflict that they believe
bring more peace and unity. In an effort to create a caring community, societies
have always tried to find good ways of dealing with and resolving conflicts.
Wherever people gather, like in schools and communities, chances of seeing
things differently are high, hence the occurrence of conflict. Families, schools and
communities need to have skills to find ways of helping people in a disagreement.
In a conflict the two differing groups or people should end up with a good result
from their combined ideas. Conflicts need to be dealt within a way that leaves the
two parties satisfied. If not well handled, conflict can disturb peace and harmony.

Key words

conflict management

11A. Conflict at school and community

Fight over a textbook

Maria and Taku are in Grade 5 at Mawaya school. The school has only five Maths
textbooks in a class of forty. Maria and Taku share one book for their class work.
Maria is very fast while Taku is slow. When Maria wants to turn to the next page
Taku would still be working on the first page. They quarrel over the use of the
book. The quarrels have created enmity and now they hardly agree on anything.
The learners in the same group are now divided between the two based on their
speeds.

This shortage of textbooks in the Grade 5 class has created conflict. Learners who
used to work together well are now divided and finding it difficult to use the books
as they may want. The teacher, Mrs. Nhumwa is aware of the problem and is

thinking of a way of solving the it.



--- Page 97 ---
Sports day conflict

Learners at Mawaya schools are having their inter-house ball games competitio |
The teachers argue over the ages of those who should participate. In the team
the learners disagree in terms of what positions to play. The various competin
groups accuse those who control games of favouritism.

Impatience at a borehole

The whole community of Taru has one borehole and people and animals get their
water from that borehole. There is noise among all people waiting for their turn to
fill their buckets while others try to jump the queue. The water committee in the
village has laid down rules at the water point but the community people do not gli
follow them. The shortage of water is the reason why the women in the pictures are
shouting at each other throwing buckets around, quarrelling and end up fighting.

Activity 1

1. Which school materials can cause quarrels due to their shortage?
2. List down possible areas of unfair treatment during inter-house competitions.

Exercise 1

What happens when there are material shortages in a school?

Why did the women fight at the borehole?

Why were there many people at the borehole at the same time?
Cheating at games can cause ___

When two people — others join and take sides.

Why do people jump queues?

What caused conflict at the borehole?

How do fights and quarrels affect community unity? Give one answer.

PNM =



--- Page 98 ---
itions.
I

sams,
eting

11B. Conflict management at school and community

Mrs. Nhnumwa realised that there were many fights as a result of the shortage of
textbooks. She approached the school head to buy enough textbooks for the
children. As a way of managing and preventing the conflicts she started writing
the work on the board where each learner could read at his or her own speed.
The school head responded positively by buying enough textbooks for the class.
The availability of the textbooks resolved and prevented further conflicts amongst
the learners. Taku and Maria no longer quarreled and began to cooperate in
other school work activities.

In sports organisation the school administration decided to hire teachers from their
neighbouring schools who are neutral to officiate at their inter-nouse competitions
and in all other games in future. This helped to avoid favouritism and selfishness.
The school concentrated on cheering and supporting the team mates and it was
happiness all over the school.

The community leaders, after realising the problems of water shortage and how
it was causing quarrels and fights and dividing people, set a team of community
people who would attend to the quarrels at the borehole. The team would try
to find acceptable ways of resolving them while thinking of a long term solution,
they decided to have two more boreholes drilled. Any two people who quarrelled
were called to the village court to have their issue dealt with. The efforts helped to
mend broken relationships in the community. Some conflicts were resolved when
one of the parties simply apologised. This resulted in having short queues or no
queues in most cases. The once disturbed peace and unity was restored by the
provision of enough water points for the community.

Activity 2

a

and tell the story.



--- Page 99 ---
. Think of a conflict at school, dramatise it and show how to manage it?
Do a role play of community leaders discussing how to resolve the water
shortage problem.

. List possible sources of conflict in a community.

CE (A=W
1.
2

Why did Mrs Nhumwa decide to get enough textbooks?

. What did the Head of the school do to resolve the textbook conflict in Grade
5?

How did writing on the board by the teacher help the different learners?

Who resolved the water shortage in the community?

How did the school head help to avoid favouritism and selfishness during

sports competitions?

What was restored by providing enough water points?

What was the work of the borehole team set up by the village leaders?

How did water availability help community relations?

oA w

© No

Summary

* Itis normal to have conflict in families, groups, communities and nations.

* Conflict can be caused by resource shortages, favouritism, selfishness and
greed.

+ Conflictcanbe managed and even beresolved by using different approaches.

* Conflict can be managed at family, community, school and national levels.

Glossary

Relations the way people are connected to each other by birth,
friendships or association. ;
Resolve get a solution to a problem.

Restore bring back to what something was in the beginning.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Shortage of resources can lead to
A. development B. unity
C. harmony D. conflict
2. Control of games by referees and umpires can cause conflict because of

A. favouritism B. fairness
C. disagreements D. silence



--- Page 100 ---
and

thes.
els.

. are disturbed by conflict in families, communities and nations.

A. Peace and harmony B. Books and schools
C. Boreholes and women D. Leaders and buildings

. Conflicts that begin with two individuals can worsen and cause in the

community.
A. unity B. division C. laughter D. joy

. is possible where there is peace, harmony and unity in a community.

A. Discomfort B. Development

C. Disunity D. Disrespect

In a community, conflicts can be managed usinga___in an effort to resolve
them.

A. fights B. community court

C. borehole D. school head

. Conflicts affecting families can be resolved through the involvement of .

A. mothers B. elders C. children D. fathers

. Conflict management can help to restore relationships.

A. al B. broken C. new D. absent

can help to resolve a conflict between two parties

A. An apology B. Anargument C. llltreatment D. Mistrust

. Solutions to problems that make people have conflict can help to create

time for other activities.
A. development B. water
C. quarrel D. disunity

Structured questions

. What should one party do when the other party accepts being wrong and

apologises?

. What happens if conflicts are not resolved?
. Write three possible causes of conflict in a community.
. State ways by which leaders can promote peace and harmony in their

communities.

. How can community structures help to resolve and manage conflicts?



--- Page 101 ---
Unit 12 National value systems

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. identify aspects of integrity and responsibility
2. explain responsibility and integrity as it relates to various contexts.

Background

Families and all religions are the source and protectors of values that influence how
individuals will relate, behave and treat others. Values are those principles that we
regard as important and desirable, for example, integrity, honesty, trustworthiness,
fairness and genuineness. The values systems were developed as an attempt to
create standards that would bring fairness, justice and peace in communities.
Most of the religions developed the focus of their teachings and values from these.
Zimbabwe, in an effort to encourage its citizens to have sound values and good
behaviour included these values in its constitution.

i

Key words

value integrity accountability responsibility genuineness
leadership

12 A. Responsibility and Integrity

Individuals in communities live among
others and they should behave in a
way that does not disturb community
members. A person should learn to do
things on their own and not wait to
be pushed. When doing work, people
who care will do their best while
treating others fairly. People who take
given work as theirs will be driven by
the desire to produce results that
everyone who sees the work will
be satisfied. Characteristics of well-
behaved individuals are being honest,
accurate when doing work, whose
behaviour you can rely on and they ©°otofarms

do what they say. Such individuals will not be moved away from the right thing
even when many people are against them. People of integrity respect their moral
values and those of others and are happy when they see goodness. Responsibility

nso ma oF" DM HEN ® ERAT 3



--- Page 102 ---
and integrity are best described by the following characteristics: accountability,
onesty, trustworthy, fairness and genuineness.

countability

is is when one does work or any duty openly and honestly. When individuals are
accountable it means they are responsible and have integrity. A community can
=ward accountable and honest persons by giving them community roles that

clude keeping community money or resources and leadership. Accountable
dividuals will use the power given to them by society in a way that benefits
=veryone. Accountable people will be free to answer any questions in line with
ir assigned responsibilities without any fear or bad feelings because they will be
Fansparent.

Ea Leadership

ities. In a community, individuals given positions to lead should do so by behaving well
ese. and setting a good example. By their good example, leaders influence people
ood to cooperate. Even the Zimbabwean National Anthem reminds leaders to be

responsible and to be of high integrity.

Honesty

Every community prefers fair, truthful and loyal members. Honesty refers to moral
character with values such as straight forwardness, integrity and without lying,
cheating or theft. Religions, families, communities and nations view honest people
as of great service to God and others. People who are honest enjoy freedom from
worry and respect themselves and others.

Trustworthy

Trustworthy individuals are those worth of people's confidence. They can be trusted
with taking care of community goods. By their behaviour, community people see
them as dependable and reliable because they are faithful.

Fairness

It is about telling the truth and is a sign of showing respect for one's audience. To
be fair, one has to report or behave in a correct way without bias. Fairness is about
justice and justice encourages peace, understanding and good living together.
Fairness also has to do with application of rules, laws and standards. Fairness can
be used in making decisions and judgments for the good of society.

Genvuineness

When people stand for what they say, they are considered to be genuine. Their
credibility is undisputed as they do what they say truthfully. Such characters are
not afraid of saying what is right. Genuine individuals are not afraid of pointing at
wrong things and will stand for the truth in whatever situation. By their character,
genuine people tend to be trusted and listened to.

ling
oral
lity



--- Page 103 ---
Summary

Integrity — this is when an individual respects moral values consistently
Responsible  - being answerable and accountable.

The stated values are all moral values that seek to mould an individual's character.
These moral values are connected and support each as a value system.

Glossary

3. Which moral value requires one to explain honestly and truthfully how

4. When individuals do given work whole heartedly they are showing being

Activity 1

1. Go through the National Anthem and pick statements that show the need |
for integrity among our leaders.

2. Sing the National Anthem.

3. Find out about community events where the following can be shown:
* Integrity * Trustworthiness * Fairness
* Genuineness * Leadership

. State any three values that mould the desired behaviour of people.
. What is the result of respecting moral values in a community?

community resources were used?

Which moral value best describes people who stand for what they say?
People who do not show trust, honesty and responsibility are said to lack __.
How do good leaders influence their teams?

The application of rules, laws and standards assures.

Integrity, honesty, fairness, trustworthiness and genuineness are all important
and connected values.

Leaders should lead by example. The National Anthem of Zimbabwe urges
the leaders to be examplary.

Rule, laws, and standards ensure that there is fairness, justice and peace in
communities.

Most religions teach sound moral values in an effort to create a caring and
just society.



--- Page 104 ---
End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Values are taught in .
A. schools only B. churches only
C. families, schools and religions  D. society only

2 Those entrusted to look after community goods should be ___.
A. hard B. honest C. greedy D. kind
3 Peaceful communities are known for ____ their moral values.
A. respecting B. disobeying C. ignoring D. developing
4. Which of these bring peace and unity to communities?
A. Fairness and justice B. Selfishness
C. Greed D. Dishonesty
= 5. Whos encouraged to be exemplary in the Zimbabwe National Anthem?
A. Teachers B. Fighters C. leaders D. Heroes
© 4. Families, communities and religions all teach __ in order to mould good
behaviour.
3 A. songs B. anthems C. conflicts D. moral values
© 7 Individuals who are ____ will stand for the truth in all situations and
circumstances.
A. sober B. genuine C. selfish D. united
- | 8. All of these are sound moral values except __.
A. honesty B. fairness C. selfishness D. integrity
9. Leading by example ____ followers fo learn and copy the good work.
A. influences B. weakens C. pains D. discourages
10. The ___ of rules, laws regulations and standards assures fairness.
A. presence B. absence C. knowledge D. lining

tant
Structured questions

1. Which national law calls for sound leadership?

2. How do families, religions and communities try to mould sound behaviour?

3. People who are honest enjoy freedom from ____ themselves and others.
(worry and respect/resources and money)

4. Give any two examples of values taught by religions, families and
communities.

. Match the items in the table below:

ges

ein

Effect/ Explanation
~ Results in peace and unity

Moral value
Integrity

Honesty Work with others PrskolpL rl ate
Genuineness Standing forthe truth
Fairness Free from lies, cheating and theft

Leadership Consistent respect and practice of moral values



--- Page 105 ---
Unit 13 Religion on technology and enterprise

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:

1. identify different designs on religious artefacts

2. design religious artefacts

3. state the impact of technology on religious and social values.

:

— 00 OQ FET FE qa 3g ARE REd Aq z 28858

Background

Religion has its unique art and technology has come handy in making the
production of religious artefacts easy. However, there are some people using
technology for producing and selling the religious artefacts for a living and
personal benefit. Religious objects are those objects produced for use in various
religions, ceremonies and practices. They are a constant reminder fo the followers
of a particular religion of their beliefs, traditions and identity. Religions have their
intact value system which needs to be taught or communicated to their members
and technology has had both positive and negative effects. Social media can
be used for spreading religious teachings, and other pieces of information. On the
contrary, religious values have been compromised as individuals indulge in using
technology to threaten, cheat and share information contrary to religious values
and teachings.

Key words
souvenirs businesses profit

13A. Religious artefacts and enterprise

Indigenous religious artefacts

The most common indigenous religious materials include, walking sticks, drums,
clothes, head dress, beads, percussion ware, knobkerries, bow and arrow. Some
artefacts are used in Indigenous Religion to represent some symbols of a religious
nature. Drums are used during religious ceremonies like kurova guva/umbuyiso/
galufu; ukuthethela/bira and mukwerera/ukwebula ingxoza/ukucela amazulu.
During such ceremonies artefacts are used at various stages in the process of
connecting with the spirit world. Artefacts like animal tails are used to drive away
bad spirits while the talisman is used to protect individuals from various ailments
and attack from evil spirits. There are simple artefacts which every indigenous
family should have such as knobkerries, bow and arrows, bakatwa/dagger,
wooden plates and nhekwe/snuff container. There are some religious artefacts
that are used by indigenous practitioners like traditional healers and traditional
fortune tellers/n'anga/inyanga. Examples are a head dress, animal tail and bones/
hakata/amathambo for fortune telling.



--- Page 106 ---
CATIA AIKRTESATOY

Religious artefacts are made by people within the community who sell them to
others to earn a living. Some of the indigenous religious artefacts are now being
bought by visiting tourists as souvenirs. Souvenirs are materials one buys and keeps
as a reminder of the places visited. Religious places where such artefacts are
sold as souvenirs are Great Zimbabwe monuments, Matopos and Njelele. Some
traditional healers and herbalists earn a living by selling herbs as medicines.

Christian artefacts

Christian religious artefacts include symbols and cloths such as the cross, robes,
badges, holy book, holy water, holy oil, flags, miters, purifying substances, staff and
uniforms. These artefacts are manufactured in large amounts and sold to various
denominations of Christian groups who believe in them. Some denominations
produce and sell their own artefacts. Others are produced entirely for profit by
individuals and businesses that are not even members.

Islamic artefacts

Some Islamic artefacts include, the symbol of the Crescent moon, the Quran, the
musalla/prayer mat, the topi, the subha/prayer beads and minaret. The Crescent
moon is a symbol believed to guide Muslims through life like how the moon and
stars guide night travelers across the desert. The Quran contains the word of
Allah which was revealed to Muhammad. The Mussalla/prayer mat gives a clean
surface on which to pray and is always put down facing Mecca. The Shubha/
prayer beads have ninety nine beads used to praise the name of Allah with the
largest bead being for Allah. The Topi is a traditional Arab hat used to cover one's
head during prayer. The Minaret is a symbol of the tower of a Mosque from which
the call to prayer is made. Just like in Christianity, they produce and sell their own
artefacts to their members but there are also individuals and businesses who make
and sell these artefacts to any one for profit.

Jewish artefacts

The Jews have the following artefacts, the Kippah/male prayer cap, the Menorah
which is the seven branched candlestick, the yard/pointer for reading the Torah.
They also have the Mezuzah, this is a sacred scroll on which prayers from the Torah
are written. The Star of David is a symbol of Judaism. The Torah includes five Books of
the Hebrew Bible and the dreidel is a four sided top used in a game played during
Chanukah. Just like in Islam and Christianity, these artefacts are manufactured
and sold to members by the religious group and individuals and businesses who
do it purely for profit.

Activity 1

. Visit a place that manufactures or sells religious artefacts.

2. Select one religion and draw a poster of its artefacts.

. Collect, label and display religious artefacts of religions found in your
community.

. Construct or make one religious artefact of your choice.



--- Page 107 ---
Exercise 1

Why do men wear a prayer cap in Judaism?

In which religion do you find a Minorah as an artefact?

Where do religious members get their artefacts from?

Name any two places in Zimbabwe where you can buy indigenous artefacts.
What artefact do Moslems believe guides them in life?

Every Moslem man covers his head witha ___ before prayer.

The biggest bead in the Shubah/prayer beads is dedicated to ____.

Which religion believes in the cross?

ONO AWN =

13B. Technology and values

Technology has always been used to help man work easier. Technology is any
equipment or tool which makes work easier to do. Technology continues to change
bringing in changes that are both progressive and destructive. Technology must
work around value systems for it fo be progressive. However, users of modern
technology have not always used it properly. They have been destroying social
and religious values in the process. The developments in the use of computers,
mobile phones and other information processing equipment created new
challenges that are difficult to control in social and religious circles.

The internet is a platform where information of any nature or subject can be
found. The challenge is that it provides information to any one who accesses it
regardless of age, religion or social grouping. Families and nations try to control



--- Page 108 ---
is any
hange
y must
lodern
social
uters,
1 new

ian be
esses it
control

the use of the internet for the sake of children but with very little success. Children
can open and find materials which are not of their age and this is against social
and religious teachings, expectations and desires. The use of mobiles for platforms
like facebook, twitter, whatsapp among others enables all users to exchange any
type of information. These platforms have been used for wrong reasons and in
some cases have destroyed the once intact religious and social value systems.
Children have been abused by being sent obscene messages, pictures and
videos. This sometimes affects the character and behaviour of children. The
children who would have respected the desired moral values will be tempted
to copy the immoral behaviour from the social platforms. Families should have
quality time where they talk to each other exchanging ideas but now they hardly
talk to each other due to concentration on their information tools like computers,
and cell phones. :

In society, some community members now use social platforms like whatsapp.,
messages and phone calls to threaten, shout, hurt and cheat others. Some send
false messages in an effort to steal other people's resources while others can
use the communication technology fo damage other people's reputation by
spreading false information.

Activity 2

1. List the good things you can do with a cell phone.
2. Technology brings good and bad things. Discuss.

Exercise 2

What is technology?
How has technology been used to damage other people's characters?
What social platforms have been used to exchange information?
Information available on the ____ can damage religious and social values.
Which platforms have been used to hurt or threaten others?

are usually abused by being sent obscene messages, pictures and
videos.

Family members around a table now hardly ___ to each other due to
concentration on their phones and computers.

How can technology be used to unite family members staying far apart?

coup wbd =

N

Summary

+» Religions have symbols and artefacts which they use in their religious practices.
» Religious artefacts can be produced and sold to earn a living .

+ Technology can uplift or damage religious and social values.

Technology can be used fo spread harmful information.


--- Page 109 ---
Glossary

Miters — a tall hat won by bishops as a symbol of office.
Symbols — materials or signs used fo represent the real item.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Religions can be identified by their different .

A. symbols B. complexion C. languages D. technology
2. One can buy indigenous artefacts from all these except ___.

A. Matopos B. Njelele

C. Great Zimbabwe D. Mukwati
3. Which religion uses the Musallah/prayer mat?

A. Judaism B. Indigenous Religion

C. Islam D. Christianity

4. Individuals and businesses who are not members of religions sell religious
artefacts for .

A. charity B. profit C. donations D. prayer
5. The Torah is a holy bookin ___.
A. Christianity B. Indigenous Religion
C. Judaism D. Islam
6. Which of these symbols represent Judaism?
A. Star of David B. The Cross
C. The Quran D. Bible
7 Children's moral values canbe ____ by the wrong use of modern technology.
A. enhanced B. developed
C. negatively affected D. helped
8. When people now get home they concentrate on ____ instead of sharing or
talking to each other or sharing.
A. social media B. religion
C. eating D. hurt messages
9. Technology can be positively used in religion by using it for ___.
A. social media B. preaching
C. child abuse D. inciting discrimination
10. People's reputation canbe ____ by the wrong use of technology.
A. improved B. enhanced

C. developed D. destroyed



--- Page 110 ---
Religion and Health

= \

Introduction

Religions encourage their members to practice healthy ways of living through
teachings, rules, practices and sometimes rituals. The way females and males
view themselves as individuals depends on how they were taught by their
families, religion and community. The health section has faced many changes
and challenges and HIV/AIDS is one of them because it can only be managed
and not cured. Society has the duty to ensure that everyone is safe from harm
yet the vulnerable groups like children, women, the disabled and the mentally

challenged have suffered abuse.



--- Page 111 ---
Unit 14 Sexual abuse Pel

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. state forms of sexual abuse

2. identify perpetrators of sexual abuse
3. state the importance of reporting cas

es of sexual abuse.

Background

Communities have
to children is usually committe
them such as relatives, friends a
role to playin preventing abuse t

experienced different forms of sexual abuse. Most sexual abuse
d by people who are known and are trusted by
nd neighbours. Families and communities have a
hrough education and practices that discourage
he forms of sexual abuse. The state and other organisations have
tems of dealing with sexual abuse. The Zimbabwe Republic Police
t, The Victim Friendly Unit, that deals with abuses of any form.

occurrences of 1
structures and sys
has a departmen

Key words

abuse sexual abuse

perpetrator

14A. Forms of sexual abuse and perpetrators

Forms of sexual abuse

There are a lot of forms of sexual

abuse. These are.

a) touching someone else's

private parts

showing children videos and
pictures of private parts or
naked people

C) unwanted sexual intercourse
d) improper conversations with

a minor.

b

—



--- Page 112 ---
Perpetrators of sexual abuse

From the pictures above, choose perpetrators of sexual abuse. Give reasons why
you chose those people.

Everyone can be a perpetrator of sexual abuse. Even parents and siblings can
sexually abuse you. The relationship between you and the person or the closeness
does not make them free from being suspects. Even the police, friends, teachers,
pastors, Sunday school teachers and headmasters can be perpetrators of sexual
abuse.

Reporting systems

At home and in the community children should report any form of sexual abuse
they will have experienced to their parents. If the abuser is one of the parents
children should report to the other parent. The perpetrators are usually people
known to the children who may be relatives such as uncles, aunts, in laws and
neighbours. Children are supposed to report any form of sexual abuse and make
sure that the issue is reported to the police in the shortest possible time.

The correct way of dealing with abuses of any kind is that they should be reported
to the police. The police have a department that is specially tasked with the
responsibility of handling all cases and forms of abuse. Those who commit sexual
abuses are taken to court forjudgment. Children's sexual abuse cases are handled
in away thats suitable for their age for them to feel comfortable to give information
and evidence. This is done through the Child Friendly Court. In this court children



--- Page 113 ---
are placed in a separate room where they do not face the perpetrator. This is
done to ensure the child is not afraid or intimidated by the perpetrator.

To try and stop the occurrences of abuse the government and non-governmental
organisations have awareness campaigns on forms of abuse and how to report
them. In schools and work places there are policies laid out and steps fo take
when one is being harassed or has been abused. Children can also report sexual
abuse cases through hotlines provided by the police and organisations such as
Child help line.

All forms of sexual abuse should be reported because if the perpetrators are not
dealt with they will continue to destroy the lives of young children. The dangers
of any form of abuse are that they have serious disturbances that range from
infection with diseases that include STls and HIV and AIDS. Psychologically the
victims of sexual abuse are affected in the following ways: feeling guilty, self
blame, nightmares, flashbacks, stress, mental illness and sexually transmitted
infections including HIV and AIDS. One major reason why the perpetrators should
be reported is that the abused needs to be protected from further abuse and
threats. For the safety of the learners and other people, all perpetrators should be
tried and imprisoned.

Activity 1

1. Find out about the Victim Friendly Unit in the police force.

2. Make a list of possible perpetrators of sexual abuse to minors.

3. Draw posters discouraging forms of abuse and use them for a campaign
against abuse at your school assembly.

Exercise 1

Where should child sexual abuse cases be reported to?
Why should sexual abusers be reported?
What are the health dangers to one who is sexually abused?

What are the emotional problems of sexual abuse?

What is the role of schools in the reporting system?

How do non-governmental organisations help with prevention of sexual
abuse?

If a parent commits incest where should the victim report?

In which court are children's sexual abuses handled?

chow =

© N

Summary

« Common forms of sexual abuse are exploitation, assault, molestation and
sexual harassment.

+ Families, schools, religions and communities should make their children aware
of forms of sexual abuse and how to prevent them.



--- Page 114 ---
* All sexual abuse cases should be reported to the police.

* Any form of sexual abuse affects the life of the victim.

* The police force has a department that deals with sexual abuse called the
Victim Friendly Unit.

Glossary

Emotional abuse — ill treatment that affects the mind.

Physical abuse — ill freatment that affects or injures the body.

Sexual abuse — undesired sexual advances upon another using force
or taking advantage.

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions
. ___isaform of sexual abuse.
A. School B. Intercourse with a minor
C. Beating up a woman D. Community
. __ abuse is any touch of a child's private parts.
A. Sexual B. Emotional C. Neglect D. Spiritual
. Sexual abuse can cause ____ pain.
A. emotional B. religious
C. sound health D. yelling and name calling
. A person who sexually abuses children ____ their future.
A. build B. supports C. destroys D. lacks education
. All sexual abuse cases should be reported to the _.
A. schools B. police C. communities D. teams
. Which of these can help in the prevention of sexual abuse?
A. Non-governmental Organisations. B. Social misfits
C. Molesters D. Assaulters.
____can be possible sexual abusers of children.
A. Relatives and friends B. Schools
C. Hospitals ad clinics D. Government
. Its not safe to leave children with a ____ for they may be sexually abused.
A. mother B. stranger C. teachers D. nurse and doctors
. Children can also communicate sexual abuse issues through services like
free .
A. jails B. hotlines C. courts D. sweets
10. When there is sexual abuse in the family people should ___.
A. solve the matter as a family B. report to the police
C. settle as a community D. settle as a church



--- Page 115 ---
Structured questions

Why are all forms of sexual abuse bad?
2. How can families, schools and communities ensure that children know about
forms of sexual abuse?

What is sexual harassment? Is it good or bad?

State three effects of sexual abuse.

In which department are the victims of abuse helped in the police force?

pa—

or hw



--- Page 116 ---
Unit 15 Religion and gender

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. give the meaning of gender equality
2. identify ways of balancing opportunities between men and women.

Background

Most societies have a history where male leadership was the order of the day.
However, with development and improvements in the way people think, it has
been realised that men and women are equal. Efforts have been made to fry
and improve chances for women fo access opportunities in the same way as
men. The efforts to promote equality between men and women have been met
with challenges such as lack of education and resistance from men among other
reasons. World over, there have been efforts to improve the creation of equal
opportunities.

Key words

gender equality gender sensitive

15A. Gender equality

Male and female mechanics

Gender refers to the behaviours, roles expectations and activities in a given
society. Sex is being either male or female. Gender is all about the allocation
of roles or work to be done between men and women by people in a given
community. This is heavily influenced by each community's values, customs,
norms and practices. However, there are some societies and religions that still



--- Page 117 ---
do not respect the idea and practice of gender equality. Such societies still give
prominence to men and do not view women as equals. Being gender sensitive
requires societies to view men and women as equals. To achieve this, the chances
for jobs, roles and responsibilities should be equally shared in the home, school
and community. Home and school duties like cleaning, tidying, cooking, washing
and digging should be done by both boys and girls. Home chores like herding
cattle, fetching water and firewood and ploughing should be done by both boys
and girls. Educational opportunities should be provided for both boys and girls
equally. There is no fixed work for either boys or girls.

Activity 1

1. Debate on the division of work between boys and girls in the school.
2. Research and make a list of religions that still view men and

women differently. What are the effects/results of such?
3. Discuss gender equality in the home.

Exercise 1

The difference between gender and sexis_
What is gender concerned with?

What is gender equality?

influences gender roles in communities.
How should boys and girls do work at school?
Who should be given education opportunities between a boy and a girl?
How can one be gender sensitive? Give one answer.

What influences gender roles in a given society? Give two answers.

ONAN —~

Summary

* Gender is concerned with the allocation of roles, duties and responsibilities
between men and women.

* Sexis the biological make up of being either male or female.

* Men and women are equal and should be treated equally.

* There are no specific roles or jobs for men or women.

Glossary

Equality = creating similar opportunities for boys and girls without
favouring one sex.



--- Page 118 ---
End of unit assessment 't test

Multiple choice ——

. Gender is about between males and females.

A. roles B. sex C. education D. money
2. Men and women are

A. twins B. unequal C. equal D. relatives
3. Being male or female is one's ____

A. identity B. sex C. career D. equality
4. Work in the home should be done by __

A. parentsonly B. boys C. girls D. allin the family
5. Educationis for

A. girls B. boys

C. parents D. both boys and girls
6. What influences gender practices? :

A. Culture B. Jobs C. Personality D. Roles
7. Religions that do not respect womenrights are __ to women

A. unfair B. fair C. just D. equal
8. There is no fixed work for ____

A. girls B. boys C. boysand girls D. parents

9. At school, cleaning and washing is for _____

A. boys only B. girls only C. boysand girls D. teachers
10. Work like ____ and ploughing is for both boys and girls.

A. herding cattle B. breastfeeding

C. bearing children D. eating



--- Page 119 ---
Unit 16. Religion and sexuality

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:
1. identify ways through which boys can interact
2. identify ways through which girls can interact.

Background

Most societies and religious groups have specific programmes where girls and
boys meet separately to discuss issues of growing up that relate to each sex
respectively. This is seen as effective as each group can feel free to open up on
issues affecting them. Some communities have specific programmes on sexuality
for boys and girls where elders of each sex will be working with their particular
group or religious groups for each of the two sexes.

Key words
sexuality circumsission experts

Different religions have specific practices of dealing with sexual developments
as children grow. Indigenous groups have separate setups and teachings on
sexuality and health issues. Boys were taught by uncles and other elders while
girls were taught by aunts and other religious experts. These teachings on sexual
matters can be referred to as the rites of passage, meaning that they have now
moved from being children to becoming adults. Most religions like Christianity,

Islan
as th
on S¢

Part

Parc
They
boy:
hunt
tod
not:
you!
teat
sucl
gre
a fe
grol
othe

MO!
owl
the
ASS

1.
2,
3



--- Page 120 ---
fa BR TE A TE

T= EHD DT TTR RSS—

Islam and Judaism now have special programmes on sexuality that guide children
as they grow. This they believe will help the children to get correct facts and views
on sexuality as they grow.

Paradzai and Gira

Paradzai and Gira grew up in the same village and going to the pastures together.
They also shared food and would normally take care of each other's animals. The
boys would play with other boys of their age and teach each other skills such as
hunting, trapping birds, making snares and tools. As adolescents they also got time
to discuss issues of growing up and changes happening to their bodies for them
not to worry and handle the changes well. This is meant fo make them grow up into
young men that are aware of the changes in their bodies. They would discuss in
teams, helping each other, defending themselves and how to relate with females
such as their mothers, sisters and other girls as they prepare for adulthood. The girls
grew up close to the mothers and other elders who could explain to them issues of
a female nature that would affect them as they grew up. Girls grew up playing in
groups while at the same time teaching each other skills of life and advising each
other on changes taking place in their bodies.

Most religions have platforms or groups where boys on their own and girls on their
own have both religious and sexuality programmes to guide them and educate
them as they grow. Most Christian churches have groups such as Christian
Association and Guild for Girls.

Activity 1

1. List any three health related issues from your religion.
2. Make a role play in which an aunt or uncle is teaching a child.
3. Debate on religious teachings and practices on sexuality.

Exercise 1

. Most religions have special programmes on sexuality that guide children as
they grow. [True/False]

. Paradzai and Gira would play with girls only. [True/False]

. As adolescents, Paradzai and Gira would discuss in their bodies.
Give two examples of Christian groups that help teach ladies about sexuality.

. Girls, like boys, also grew up playing in .

. Why do different religions have programmes that guide children as they
grow? Give one reason.



--- Page 121 ---
Unit 17 Religion, HIV and AIDS

Objectives

By the end of the unit you should be able to:

1. list the effects of HIV and AIDS at home and at school

2. suggest ways by which religions help in preventing the spread of HIV and AIDS
3. write poems on HIV and AIDS awareness

4. state the role of religion in HIV and AIDS awareness.

Background

A person's life is controlled by one’s health and influenced by religion. HIV and
AIDS have become important topics in health since they can only be managed
using antiretroviral medicines and are not curable. Some people avoid people
with HIV and AIDS due to fear or little knowledge. When the HIV virus enters the
human body it weakens the body from fighting diseases. Such a condition will
affect the person physically, emotionally and mentally as well as their social life. This
usually affects the person's ability to work which in turn affects the livelihood and
family stability. Religions hold different views and teachings towards health issues
including HIV and AIDS . These views can help to raise awareness and minimise the
spread of HIV and AIDS.

Key words

guidance social norms virus curable
psychosocial support

17A. Effects of HIV and AIDS

HIV and AIDS has become a worldwide health issue which has led to the loss of
many lives. In the process, it has disturbed development, livelihoods, family life,
peace and harmony in the family. HIV and AIDS affects the learning of children
in two ways. Those with infected parents or relatives are seriously disturbed as
educational support in the form of school fees, uniforms and stationery can no
longer come easily and those born with the condition have to take medication
and continue with their education like anyone else. When HIV and AIDS was
discovered, people were afraid, they developed negative attitudes towards
those affected and living with the disease. This was mainly because people had
little knowledge and understanding of how individuals got infected and how they
could be cured. Those initially infected got ill and weak and most left work and
went home to be cared for. Communities have social, religious and cultural ways
of explaining the condition. In the early days of HIV and AIDS the media used
messages of fear because there was no cure or way of dealing with it. People
developed bad feelings and ill-treated those living with the disease.

4
a
fc
n
C
a
R
a
a
Y
k
fl
Cc
=
C
t


--- Page 122 ---
Those infected were mainly among the working class and the young who were
sexually active, resulting in loss of life. Loss of life in turn affected the economy
as skilled and experienced personnel died. Family and community relations were
strained because people were accusing each other of witchcraft and magic
instead of facing the reality that HIV and AIDS is a disease that is mainly transmitted
through unprotected sex among many other methods such as, using injections
contaminated with the virus and getting in contact with infected blood.

Activity 1

List ways of how people take care of those living with the HIV virus?

Exercise 1

. How did more knowledge on HIV and AIDS help community relations?
. How can schools help in the HIV and AIDS awareness campaigns?

. How did HIV and AIDS affect the economy?

. How are school children affected by HIV and AIDS?

. What weakens the body of a person living with HIV and AIDS?

17B. Solutions to HIV and AIDS

More information in the health sector brought safe ways of handling and treating
those living with the virus such as Home based Care, Psychosocial Support and
peer education. Psychosocial Support is support that helps people to heal from
mental, emotional or physical hurt. The conditions of those living with the virus
and those affected have greatly improved. Great relief came when medicines
fo manage the virus called Antiretroviral Viral Therapy (ART) came into use. These
medicines help to weaken the virus and make the affected regain strength to
carry out normal livelihood tasks. People taking antiretroviral therapy live life like
any other person without being bedridden or always feeling sick.

Religions have helped people to understand the causes and effects of HIV
and AIDS and some of them have even created programmes on HIV and AIDS
awareness, management, care and support. Religious groups can help by creating
youth groups which teach prevention and social support issues in HIV and AIDS.
However some religious views and practices towards health such as prohibiting
their followers from seeking medication have resulted in loss of lives. As more
accurate health information was discovered through research communities, the
Health Sector became aware of its causes, effects and ways of managing it. HIV
and AIDS is no longer a fearsome disease as it was in the past. This is largely due to
the four main pillars of awareness, treatment, care and support.


--- Page 123 ---
present to the class.

Research on any religious organisation's HIV and AIDS programme and

List ways of caring for people living with HIV and AIDS. Out
Find any four churches/religious groups that have HIV and AIDS programmes. Jo t
20

Exercise 2 pee
org

. What is abstinence in HIV and AIDS prevention? AID
. What is home based care in HIV and AIDS? do

. What are antiretroviral medicines?

When youngsters of the same age teach each other about HIV and AIDS

that is called ;

. What is psychosocial support?
How has the life of people taking antiretroviral medicines been improved?
How can other people help those living with the HIV virus?
How can religious groups help prevent the spread of HIV and AIDS among

the youth?

17C. Awareness on HIV and AIDS

Religions, families, schools,
communities, companies,
organisationsandgovernment
are helping in the HIV and
AIDS awareness programmes.
There are various ways being
employed to make people
aware of HIV and AIDS
causes, effects, possible ways
of prevention and managing
it for those living with the virus.
Some methods used in HIV
and AIDS awareness include
peer education, outreach
programmes, community
sessions on HIV and AIDS,
group discussions, facilitators,

campaigns, literature, drama, poems and posters. Religions have also taken an

Lady teaching about HIV and AIDS in church

active role in the HIV and AIDS awareness programmes. <

Peer education

It is about individuals of the same age or level educating each other about HIV 1



--- Page 124 ---
and AIDS. The advantages are that it is easier to share with someone who is about
one's age. Peers can discuss health and sexualissues including HIV and AIDS freely.

Outreach programmes

To try and reach a lot of people, health personnel, the private sector and non
-governmental organisations have fo come up with programmes that make
people in remote and hard to reach areas get HIV and AIDS information. They
organise teams that visit the communal areas educating people about HIV and
AIDS as well as other health issues. They use information on posters and pamphlets,
do home visits, campaigns, drama, poetry and even do counselling and testing.

Religious programmes

Many religious groups have been educated in HIV and AIDS and are in furn passing
on the information and organising programmes for their followers. Even religions
which used to discourage it are now encouraging their members to access health
and HIV and AIDS services. This has helped in the reduction of the spread of HIV
and AIDS. It has also improved the lives of those living with the virus. This change of
attitude has helped to fight stigma and discrimination of those living with it.

Activity 3

1. Dramatise an HIV and AIDS awareness gala.
2. Write a short poem on HIV and AIDS then recite it to the class.
3. Design an HIV and AIDS awareness poster.

Exercise 3

How is peer education effective in HIV and AIDS prevention?

. Name at least three groups that have HIV and AIDS awareness programmes.

. Which government department normally has outreach programmes for HIV
and AIDS awareness campaigns?

. Which methods of learning can be used in HIV and AIDS awareness
campaigns?

. State any two written forms of HIV and AIDS education materials.
How are religious groups helping to reduce the spread of HIV and AIDS?

. How does counselling and testing help to reduce the spread?

. When people avoid a person with HIV and AIDS because of the disease we
call this .

Summary

« HIVis a virus that affects the immune system and weakens the body.
« HIV and AIDS can only be managed but cannot be cured.



--- Page 125 ---
There are good and bad attitudes towards people living with HIV and AIDS.
« There are many ways that can be used to raise awareness on HIV and AIDS.
+ Religions teach children facts on sexuality.

Glossary

Antiretroviral — these are medicines used to manage the conditions of
people living with HIV and AIDS.

Campaigns — these are well planned and organised activities aimed at
bringing awareness of a particular thing.

Discrimination — the different treatment, usually not good, given to a
person living with the HIV virus.

Stereo-type — understanding and practices that regard systems as
fixed and unchangeable.

Stigma — the negative feelings associated with a condition.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions
1. What has been lost as a result of HIV and AIDS?

A. Practice B. Lives

C. Rites D. Passage
2. HVand AIDS __.

A. is curable B. attacks the body

C. has no cure D. infects young children only
3. HIV and AIDS has disturbed all these except ____ in the family.

A. development B. livelihoods

C. family life, peace and harmony D. political life
4. What medicines are used to manage HIV and AIDS?

A. Tablets B. Antiretroviral medicines
C. Anointed oll D. Tuberculosis tablets
5. Different religions also play animportant role in _ awareness programmes.
A. HIV and AIDS B. Christmas
C. Birthday D. Offering
6. isa virus that affects the immune system and weakens the body.
A. Flue B. HIV C. Cold D. Cancer
7. Which method is used for people of the same age to share information?
A. Peer education B. Adult education

C. Women education D. Primary education



--- Page 126 ---
. One of the awareness programmes involves .

A. forcing people B. counselling and testing
C. stereotypes D. promiscuity and polygamy
Many religions now discourage ____ in an effort to minimise the spread of HIV
and AIDS.
A. monogamy B. HIV and AIDS programmes
C. polygamy D. big families
. Most religions are now changing their attitudes and views on the of

women by giving them equal treatment.

Shown ~

A. discrimination B. discouragement
C. rites D. passage

Structured questions

HIV and AIDS is curable. [True/False]

What activities take place at an HIV and AIDS awareness gala?
What is education between peers called?

Who is usually disadvantaged by stereotype views and practices?
Why do religious groups have programmes on sexuality for young children?
Why do some people fear those living with the HIV and AIDS virus?



--- Page 127 ---
Unit 18 Healthy Living

Objectives “A

By the end of the unit you should be able to: or re

1. identify different religious teachings on personal hygiene ie.

2. discuss healthy habits of fl

3. suggest ways in which healthy habits are encouraged in religions. ™»
is

spe

Background follc

Most religions teach and enforce high standards of personal hygiene and personal The

health habits. Some of the practices like washing of hands and cleanliness of the wa

body are common across many religions, for example, Islam, Judaism, Christianity and

and Indigenous Religion. Religions believe that a person who practices good prc

physical health habits such as eating well and keeping the body fit will have a Jui

healthy spiritual life. Most religions have prescriptions and standards from their

sources of teachings such as the Quran, the Torah, the Bible and religious traditions. ot

a

wh

Key words Le

purification religious traditions SUL

un

18A. Personal hygiene ily

Th

Th

ini

of

Cc

c

cl

b

is

b

ill

Tl

Keeping the body clean

Most religions practice high standards of hygiene as a way of keeping their
members clean, physically, socially, mentally and spiritually. There is a general
thinking among some of the religions like Indigenous Religion, Christianity, Judaism
and Islam that the body should be kept clean at all times.


--- Page 128 ---
Islam

Islam enforces and practices a high standard of personal hygiene. Moslems take
the importance of cleanliness from their religious founder Muhammad who noted
that, “Cleanliness is half of faith". The believers purify themselves before any social
or religious activity or ritual. This practice is dlso important and is enforced for daily
life. The Muslims practice personal hygiene in several ways that include, washing
of the whole body to remove any dirt that might make the body unclean. They
believe in not eating unclean food. They believe that a pig's diet and way of living
is very unclean therefore eating its meat makes a person dirty. There are some
special ways of washing in preparation for specific religious rites. Islam expects its
followers to eat clean and wholesome food, exercise and lead a healthy life style.
The Quran notes that “O you who believe! When you intend to offer the prayer,
wash your faces and your hands (forearms) up to the elbows, wipe your heads
and wash your feet up to the ankles”. This shows that cleanliness and all religious
practices in Islam cannot be separated.

Judaism

Judaism is one of the religions that has clear rules of health practices such as
hand washing. Hand washing has specific times and occasions during the day
when it is practiced. Before prayer and other rituals, a person is expected to clean
or purify themselves. Most Jewish families have a purification place set aside for
such practices. Purification of the whole body is done to remove any form of
uncleanliness. The Jews believe in respecting one's body as a way of maintaining
their respect for God. The month of February is dedicated to support and help for
those living with disability. Jews view God as the healer and protector of the sick.
This makes prayer to God an important process as a way of ensuring sound health.
The Jewish teachings prohibit eating any food that is not healthy or has been
infected as recorded as God's word in the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy
of the Torah.

Christianity

Christianity believes that the body is the temple of God and therefore must be kept
clean as found in the New Testament, for example, 1 Corinthians 6:19. Christians
believe that cleanliness is next to Godliness, therefore, a clean and pure body
is ready to worship God. This shows that they value health through keeping the
body clean. Some groups in Christianity believe in the power of healing physical
illness through prayer and some use of holy water or oil for driving away evil spirits.
The Christians follow the example of Jesus Christ of healing the sick and curing
those with diseases and disabilities. They believe that healing of the physical body
will make one happy and able to praise God.

Indigenous religion

Indigenous Religion believes in sound personal hygiene through their rites and
rituals such as circumcision and first practice as one grows from childhood into



--- Page 129 ---
adulthood. These are taught to the young men and women on how to keep their
bodies clean until they get married. Personal hygiene is an important aspect in
food handling and preparations on a daily basis as well as for rituals and religious
ceremonies. For example, the brewing of traditional beer for ceremonies like bira/
ukuthethela, mukwerera/rainmaking is done by women seen as clean, young girls
and elderly women. Religious utensils were made from materials that are free
from rust such as wood for protection of health.

Activity 1

1. Choose one religion and write its personal hygiene practices.
2. In groups, make a chart using cuttings of religious personal hygiene rituals
and practices.

Exercise 1

Which religion believes that cleanliness is half of faith?

What do Christians say about personal cleanliness and God?

What are the four aspects that make a person clean and cannot be
separated?

Why is washing of hands an important personal health practice?
Why do people in different religions purify themselves by washing the whole
body before any ritual or ceremony?

In which books of the Torah is personal hygiene written down?

Why are clean women given the duty to prepare food and beer for
ceremonies in indigenous religion?

Why does Indigenous Religion use wooden utensils?

16B. Health habits

All religions have a set standard for good health habits.
The body that exercises well and gets enough rest is a |
healthy body. The diet should be good enough to supply
all nutrients needed by the body. It's a good health
practice to take good care of one's skin. Simple habits
that some religions teach include cleanliness habits like,
keeping one's hair short and smart, taking good care of
one's mouth and teeth, regular body bathing, keeping
your fingers clean including cutting your fingernails and
toe nails.

Giving one's body enough exercise makes the body fit,
strong and active. This eliminates diseases and other
body weaknesses. Allowing one's body enough rest and
sleep is another way of ensuring a healthy body. Christians
follow Jesus’ example that after teaching He would go



--- Page 130 ---
and look for a place to rest peacefully. Too
much sun and cold destroy the skin. It is
important to wear a hat when it is too hot
and warm clothes when it is cold. This helps
the skin to remain strong and healthy. The
skin should also be protected from injuries
and bruising as these wounds and cuts
allow diseases, germs and bacteria to enter
the body.

Most religions respect rest by setting a day
of rest in a particular time period. Jews fully
rest on such days to the point that they
don't even cook food on the day of rest.
Most Muslims regard Friday as a day on
which they should rest and no work should
be done. In Indigenous Religion, a day set
aside for rest is called Chisi/lzilo on which no
work should be done as a sign of respect
to the body and the ancestral spirits.
Indigenous Religion practices use herbs in
dealing with particular health problems to
keep the body fit. Among the herbs used Chicken salad

are some to clean the body of impurities, for healing wounds and general mouth
care. With modern health practices, people use a toothbrush and toothpaste to
brush their teeth. The food that people eat is also very important. Healthy eating
improves one's health.

Activity 2

1. Write the days of rest for the following religions

Religion Day of rest
EE TP ey 3 hao Cas Ei a
les Poa Ll RED Vhs Fo. 2 »

Juddism

2. Find indigenous trees that are used for mouth care and bring pieces of each.



--- Page 131 ---
Exercise 2

Moslems rest on _ day.

Which religion does not even cook on the day of rest?

Why is a pig seen as unhealthy by Muslims and Jews?

The day of rest in Indigenous Religions

State any three good healthy habits?

What should a person do to protect the skin from heat and cold?
During the day of rest, followers of Indigenous Religion respect
After working hard Jesus __

NOONAN —

Summary

* Most religions practice high standards of hygiene as a way of keeping their
bodies clean.

There is a connection between bodily cleanliness and spiritual purity.
Religions respect rest as a good health habit.

There are foods seen as clean and some seen as unclean by different religions.
Most religions encourage habits that maintain cleanliness of the body.

Glossary

Bacteria very small or tiny living things that carry diseases.
Herbs these are plants that have medicinal properties and can be
used to solve health problems.

Germs very small organisms that can cause diseases.

Nutrients these are the food values that are found in food and are needed
in the body.

End of unit assessment Fest

Multiple choice p———

1. Religions enforce a standard of
A. exercise . eating
C. sleep . personal hygiene
2. Muslims donoteat
A. vegetables B. beef
C. pork D. chicken
3. Why is it now easier to deal with HIV and AIDS than when it started?
A. Itis now manageable. B. [tis now curable.
C. Stigma and discrimination. D. Aftitudes.



--- Page 132 ---
. What is the best way to deal with people living with the HIV virus?

Sor ON—

. Name two religions that regard a pig's way of life and feeding as dirty and

. Which two books in the Torah talk of diet and health practices?

10.

A. Leave them alone.

B. Give them special treatment.

C. Respect and deal with them fairly like any other person.
D. Ignore them.

Which personal hygiene practice is common in most religions?

A. Hand washing B. Body washing

C. Feet washing D. Head washing

Which religion practices halaal as a way of keeping their meat clean?
A. Christianity B. Islam

C. Judaism D. Indigenous Religion

therefore do not eat pork?

A. Christianity and Indigenous Religion

B. Judaism and Islam

C. Judaism and Christianity

D. Indigenous Religion and Islam

Jews, Moslems and some indigenous ethnic groups have a common ritual
health practice for boys called _

A. circumcision B. purification

C. mass D. rainmaking

A. Genesis and Leviticus B. Leviticus and Deuteronomy
C. Genesis and Deuteronomy D. Deuteronomy and Acts
Plants that can be used as medicines are called .

A. tablets B. herbs

C. flowers D. magic

Structured questions

List any three healthy foods.

What is sexual harassment?

Identify any three organisations that can help victims of abuse.
Give any two ritual ceremonies practiced for girls.

Christians say cleanliness is next to _

Most religions believe that physical cleanliness results in spiritual



--- Page 133 ---
End of year assessment

Paper 1: 1hr 30 minutes
Marks: 50 marks

Multiple choice questions

1. A family with a father, mother and children is a family.
A. monogamous B. polygamous
C. blended D. nuclear
2. A is the family history from the present to its origins through the
ancestors.
A. ceremony B. lineage C. ritual D. religion

3. People attend funerals in their communities as a way of giving
support.

A. emotional B. grievance C. ancestral D. traditional
4. Nhimbe/llima is a form of community work.
A. commercial B. ceremonial C. cooperative D. ritual
S. care is when relatives take care of their sick relative.
A. School B. Community C. Home-based D. Church
6. Child guidance and protection is the responsibility of the
A. whole community B. aunts
C. whole group D. uncles
7. When people of different religions and cultures work well together this is a sign
of .
A. neglect B. communion C. worship D. tolerance
8. Wheninrespected places, men take off their as a sign of respect.
A. hats B. shirts C. clothes D. coats
9. Members of a family share their work according to ability.
A. equally B. spiritually C. religiously D. politically
10. When at community cooperative activities like a nhimbe/ilima, the take
care of the children.
A. men B. aunt C. herd boys D. elderly
11. How many ethnic group languages are listed in the Zimbabwe constitution?
A. Sixteen B. Twenty C. Six D. Two
12. is one of Zimbabwe's national ancestors.
A. Mugabe B. Mbuya Nehanda
C. Ndlovu D. Nkomo
13. Which of these is an indigenous religious artefact?
A. chalice B. cross C. spear D. jug
14. A is used by women in preparing food in indigenous societies.

A. whisk B. ngundu C. wheel D. walking stick



--- Page 134 ---


--- Page 135 ---
. Which of these is considered immoral?

A. Helping B. Tolerance C. Caring D. Bullying

. Any person is free to join a religion of one's choice. This is freedom of ‘

A. worship B. cooperation C. interaction D. tolerance

. School children should all school work given to them.

A. do B. notdo C. choose D. not worry about

. Religion should assist government in the of children’s rights.

A. avoidance B. notteaching C. ignoring D. promotion

. Participating in development projects by members of the community brings

A. peace and harmony B. disharmony

C. conflict D. divisions

. Scolding others can create in a school.

A. peace B. harmony C. conflict D. development
promote peace and harmony by managing conflict in their

communities.

A. Gangs B. Traditional leaders

C. Women D. Children

. Responsibility and integrity are that make a good person in a

community.

A. practices B. symbols C. artefacts D. values

. Technology should be used in religious groups.

A. uncontrollably B. anyway C. responsibly D. seldomly

. Which of these is a form of child abuse?

A. Neglect B. Support C. Prayer D. Care

. Perpetrators of abuse of any kind should be .

A. killed B. left alone

C. reported to the police D. fined

. In society, men and women should be treated .

A. differently ~~ B. selectively C. equally D. independently

. Bad sexual behavior, dressing and language in the presence of a person of

the opposite sex is viewed as .

A. physical harassment B. sexual harassment

C. mental harassment D. emotional harassment

.In Indigenous Religion, girls learn about womanhood during

ceremonies.

A. marriage B. wedding C. initiation D. funeral

. In indigenous societies girls are taught manners and etiquette by their

A. aunts B. uncles C. sisters-in-law D. brothers-in-law.

. People should not be discriminated because of their status.

A. wealth B. HIVand AIDS C. political D. economic

. Most religions teach the importance of washing of before holding

and eating any food.

A. whole body B. elbows C. legs D. hands



--- Page 136 ---
49. People should for healthy living.
A. eatright, rest and exercise B. eat alot and never exercise
C. eatright and never rest D. eatright and never work

50. In the absence of toothbrushes and toothpaste, indigenous people use
to brushes their teeth.
A. fingers B. nothing at all
C. parts of any tree D. parts of particular trees

Structured questions

Paper 2: 1 hr 30 mins

Section A 30 marks

Answer all questions in this section.

1. One day Jesus taught many people using the following parable.
A father had two sons. He wanted some work to be done in the fields. He
asked the first son fo go and do the work. The son refused saying he was busy.
He went to the second son who accepted to go and do the work but did not
go. The first son realised his mistake and went to the field to do the work. Jesus
asked the crowd which one of the two sons did his father's will?
a) What was the first son's reaction to his father's instruction? [nM]
b) What is wrong with the second son's behaviour? [1
c) Which one of the sons was better and why? [2]
d) According to this parable, what is important between deeds and words?
[1]
Sheena is a Moslem woman. She is married to Ali and enjoys her work in
the home as a mother. Women in Islam enjoy the same rights as men. The
difference is only when it comes to physical work and women cannot do the
same duties as men. Sheena buys and sells things and Ali allows her because
Islamic law permits to do so. This relates to any business activity that does not
affect her respect and honour as a wife. Sheena uses the money the way she
likes and can sometimes decide to give her husband.
a) Do women enjoy the same rights as men in Islam?
b) Whois entitled to do the hard physical work in Islam?
c) Who controls the money earned by a Moslem woman?
d) What should a Moslem woman maintain when doing business?
Sarudzai Mhofu is now twenty years old and is about to get married to Thabani
Ndlovu. Mr Moyondizvo, the Mhofu family friend, has been chosen to be
the go-between. Mr Moyondizvo will arrange the marriage discussions and
payment of lobola. Sarudzai's aunts have already visited the Ndlovu family
for assessment and have agreed to their daughter's marriage to the Ndlovus.
The lobola procedures will take place at Mr Mhofu's homestead, in Sarudzai's
mother’s kitchen.



--- Page 137 ---
What is the role of a go-between in indigenous marriages? (1

Which two totems are mentioned in Sarudzai's marriage plans? [2]

In which building are indigenous marriage procedures held? [1]

What is the role of the aunts in indigenous marriage preparations? [1]
Food is important in Judaism. Miriam is David's wife. Miriam, being a mother}
in a Jewish family, makes sure that all food eaten in the home is fit and clean
according to the Jewish food laws called Kosher. Miriam will never serve milk
and other dairy foods during the same meal with meat. Miriam's husband
David is a shochet. His work is to slaughter animals. He uses a very sharp knife
to make sure the animals feel minimum pain. He also makes sure that all blood
drains from the meat. He soaks the meat in salt water to make sure that the
blood is removed.

What law does Miriam follow in preparing food for the family? [M

What is the shochet's work?

How is blood removed from meat?

Why should a sharp knife be used when slaughtering an animal?

What is a child headed family?

What activities show that indigenous people help each other?

When do people need emotional support?

State any two good morals.

State two forms of abuse of children.

What is sexual harassment?

What should be done when one is abused?

Name two types of conflict that can take place at school.

State any two health habits.

Section B
Answer any four questions from the six below.

1. Fillin the table with the correct answer.

Holy Place /City

- Njelele Shrine
Temple in Jerusalem
Kaba In Mecca
Jerusalem

2. Religions practice good health habits like resting.
Complete the table below.



--- Page 138 ---
a) Friday

b) Sabbath

c) Chisi/izilo/ximusi
d) Sunday

[4]
Give two examples of church activities that encourage prevention of the
spread of HIV and AIDS. [2]
Why is it wrong to discriminate against those living with HIV and AIDS? [1]
HIV and AIDS is feared because it is [1]

Honesty and fairness are aspects of
Where can one buy indigenous artefacts?
State any two good things about technology in religious practices.
State two community service centres.
Match the situation to a place/founder of the place.

Founder?/ Place

The physically handicapped Mother of peace
Orphans Musasa Project
Abused women Mutemwa
Leprosy Jairosi Jiri

Old people Mathew Rusike

Who protects the values and the land in traditional communities?
Who is expected to kneel as a sign of respect to elders?

What role can the community play at funerals?

To whom do families trace their origins in indigenous societies?
What is home based care?



--- Page 139 ---
BA college press E ; ZA college press
Ventures Primary i Ventures Primary
Gore ReChishanu or English
ChiShona [

BA college press

Ventures Primary
Science and Technology

New Curriculum

Bhuku ReMudzidzi

~ |cottege press

Ventures Primary

28 college press 2A cotiege press

Ventures Primary Ventures Primary

New Curriculum
New Curriculum

Agriculture Heritage-Social Studies Mathematics

A |college press

Ventures Primary
Indonsakusa

Ugwalo Lomfundi


--- Page 140 ---
Ventures Primary
Family, Religion
and Moral
Education Grade

Ventures Primary Family, Religion and Moral Education Grade 5 Learner's Book has been
developed to support the content, aims and objectives contained in the Updated Primary
Education Curriculum for Zimbabwe. It contains all the activities that the learners need to
cover the Family, Religion and Moral Education Syllabus for Grade 5.

The book:

* Provides exercises and learner-centred activities which enable learners to understand
Family, Religion and Moral Education.

* Caters for both rural and urban environments.

* Includes a variety of assessment tests at the end of each unit, topic and term.

* Offers many individual, group and class activities that stimulate decision making,
problem solving and cooperation.

* Uses clear language that is easy to understand.

* Has a detailed glossary which clearly defines the vocabulary in the text.

The Learner's Book is part of the Junior Primary learner's Development Series completed
i mprehensive Facilitator's Resource Book | |
9 1781

BA college press
779007278

Annravad hw thea AMinitedris Af Delve rer sr sao od © momo od oe oo Fl 2% ena;



