--- Page 1 ---
I mn A a —
‘| I 0B | 3 | 1
| L 4

Grade 7

28 March 2024

©0777704393 Onias Mutunami  O715 352297 <<



--- Page 2 ---
What is report writing

A report is a written account of something that one has

1. observed

ii. heard

iii. done

iv. investigated.

It is a systematic and well organised presentation of facts and findings of an event that has
already taken place somewhere. These facts are paragraphed. Reports are used as a form of
written assessment to find out what you have learned from your reading, research or experience
and to give you experience of an important skill that is widely used in the work place.

Report Writing: Things to Keep in Mind

Before writing a report, there are certain things you must know to ensure that you draft a precise
and structured report, and these points to remember are listed below:

title of the report.

Always use the past tense.

to whom the report is directed

Don’t explain the issue in the first person, i.e. ‘I’ or ‘Me’. Always write in the
third person. Use referring words such as he, she, they, it, and so on.

Put the date, name of the place as well as the reporter’s name after the heading.

Structure the report by dividing it into paragraphs.
Stick to the facts and keep it descriptive.

However, at Grade 7 level candidates should mainly take note of the following.

i. tittle of the report

il. name of the author

iii. date the report was written

iv. to whom the report is directed

The order of the above key contents of a report may not necessarily written in order. The bottom
line is that all the above information should be available. However, by mere looking we can see
that it is wise to have this order when writing a report.

> > 0777704393 Onias Mutunami O75 352 297¢



--- Page 3 ---
Write a report to the Head of your school about high level of indiscipline at the school.

tittle of the report High level of indiscipline at
our school

il. date the report was written 10 August 2022
iil. recipient (to whom the report is directed) To the school head

iv. introduction of the report

v. body of your report

vi. conclusion of the report

vii. author of the report Written by / From Onias
Mutunami

The length of your report should be at least one hundred and twenty words.

Avoid use contraction words such as i. don’t
ii. won’t
iii. doesn’t
iv. weren't

Other words which must be avoided include close demonstratives which include
i. this
il. these

A report must be i. clear of its theme / aim
have its contents well organised — in correct sequence
and paragraphed.
in good simple past tense
be free from grammatical and spelling errors.

A candidate who has omitted, date, tittle author, recipient is penalised only
one mark therefore its not a serious offence to omit such. But let us do
the correct thing and avoid teaching using ZIMSEC standards

Question

Your community is about to face the worst drought ever experienced. Write a report to your
Member of Parliament informing him / her about this sad development. In your report include
- affected communities and population - causes

- its negative impacts - urgent assistance needed

Pp |0777704 393 Onias Mutunaml  O715 352 297



