--- Page 1 ---
—————— LS Ce

—— ee

Din Ww WwW WS N Www SS ee

introduction

Seach one of us belongs to a family. A family name is used as a surname and the
‘mv name usually comes from a totem. A family is made up of members who
save different roles. There are different types of families. Some families are large
sec some are small. Families have different gatherings that bring unity among
er members. Different families have different religions.



--- Page 2 ---
Unit 1 Concept of the family

]. identify members of a family
2. state roles of family members
3. identify different types of families
4. state family names

5. identify totems.

Background

You have learnt that a family is a group of people who are connected to each
other by birth, marriage or adoption. Marriage is a union of an adult man and
woman to make a family. Adoption is the process of legally caring for another
person's Child as your own. There are different family structures which are nuclear,
one parent, monogamous, polygamous and child headed family. We also learnt

that families share a name which is called a surname. |n some families the surname
come from their totem.

Key words

adoption. mariage

1A. Roles of family members
i) Family members



--- Page 3 ---
io)
PT
1A
nt
ie

Name some family members you know. In the picture, identify the father, mother,
daughter, son, grandmother and grandfather.

“iy name is Musa. My parents are my father and mother. My grandmother is my
mother’s mother and or my father's mother. The person | call grandfather is my
mother's father and or my father’s father. The girls in my family are my sisters. The
poys are my brothers. My aunts are my parents’ sisters and uncles are my parents’
crothers. | have cousins too. These are my aunts’ and uncles’ children.

ii) Roles

4 family is made up of a father, mother and children. Each member in the family
"as an important role to play. Parents work very hard for their children. They
provide some basic needs like shelter, food, education and clothing. They are
also responsible for the upkeep of the whole family.

=amily members refer to grandparents for knowledge and wisdom. An aunt or an
uncle according to our tradition assists in the settling of disputes in families. Boys
and girls help in herding cattle, cleaning dishes and the house. They also water or
weed the garden. These duties vary according to different families and family set-

me
Wo.



--- Page 4 ---
Activity 1

Complete the table below in groups.

Family member Role played
Father

|
3 |
Uncle

| 6 | Niecé/nepnew
Grandmother
| 3 Grandfather

Exercise 1

A family is a of people who are connected to each other.
give family members knowledge and wisdom.

Family members have different

List two activities that boys do at home.

List two activities that girls do at home.

1B. Family types
i) Nuclear



--- Page 5 ---
A nuclear family is the smallest family among all types of families. It is made up of a
father, mother and children. A nuclear family may be made up of a mother, father
and children. Siblings of a nuclear family may be one or two in small families. The
family usually has enough wealth to spend since the members are very few. The
family has one surname, that of the father.

ii) Monogamous family

& monogamous family is when a person is married to one wife or husband at a
We. Anna's family is a monogamous family. She comes from a family where all
SPidren are from the same mother and father. Her father, Mr Mlambo, is a teacher
emo teaches in Gweru urban. Her mother also works in Gwery at a hospital. They
fee 9 Senga, one of Gweru’s suburbs. Their first born child is Anna. Their second
Som is a boy, Henry. Themba comes after Henry. Themba is six years old and is
ree years younger than Henry. Anna is two years older than Henry. Their last born
pic. who is the fourth, is a girl. Ruvimbo, nicknamed Rutru, will be going for Early
Ichood Development (ECD) grade next year. This is a happy family of six.

Activity 2

Draw on your computers members of the monogamous family.
Label the family members you have drawn.



--- Page 6 ---
iii) Polygamous family

.

k re
ea it | <=

Polygamy is the practice of being married to more than one wife at a time. A
polygamous family is the one which has a father with more than one wife. The
family usually has many children since there are many wives. The father finds some
ways of maintaining discipline. The wives are supposed to respect one another.
The wives depending on who came first call each other amaiguru/umam'omdala
and amainini/umam'omncane. The children respect all the women in their family
and call them mother (amai/mama). Position amongst the wives and children is
respected. The first wife is respected by the young wives.

Some polygamous families eat from one kitchen but in some cases,each wife has
her own. The husband is the one who take turns to eat from each wife's kitchen.

iv) Child-headed



--- Page 7 ---
LA
The

ner.
ala
nily
nis

10s

aded family is found in most communities. If is headed by a child usually
—~<€ age © of eighteen. In a child-neaded family the eldest child usually takes
€ “¥s or her siblings. He or she looks for jobs fo earn money to send the other
school, buy food and clothes. The children may help each other in
usehold chores like washing clothes and plates, sweeping the house and

“The eldest child mostly does the hard jobs such as digging.

Se families have one parent also known as a single parent, either the mother
a he father. This kind of a family is called a one parent family. There are many
ses. such as death or divorce which lead to a one parent family. In the case
= Gvorce the parent who does not live with fhe child or children is free to help
® swoporting the children. In most cases the parent living with the children is
S=sponsible for taking care of them. He or she provides food, shelter, clothes and
money for school fees. The parent in a one parent family does all roles such as
©o0king and washing clothes for the children.

Activity 3
® pairs, unscramble the following words into sensible words and report back to

He class:
| @rayl, methro, panrte, fthera, cheldirn, kichten, wevis. repscet, palymgoy,
somunimty.

Choose the correct answer from a list of answers given below:
1. A family is whereby a man has more than one wife.
A family that is headed by a child is called a family.



--- Page 8 ---
A family with one parent is called a parent family.
A child is a person below years.

A polygamist is a man with more than one _____
How many types of families have you learnt?
Two causes of a one parent family can be or
. |come froma family.

eighteen divorce polygamous death child-headed one wife five

ON XARA

1C. Family names and totems

Names

Family names can be called surnames. People who are not related sometimes
have the same surname.

Activity 4

Game
In turns say your family names as a class. The first one says: My family name
is and what is your family name? The second responds and asks
the third child to say his/her family name. The third responds, then the fourth,
then the fifth, until the whole class has said their family name. Those with full
knowledge about their family names explain to the class how the names came
about. You can recite a poem of the totems you know.

Totems/Izitemo/Miftupo



--- Page 9 ---
mes

me
sks

fal

me

Secours? Here are a few common ones: Nzou/Ndlovu/Tlou, Nyati/Nyathi, Shiri/
Seani/Nyoni, Shumba/Sibanda, Mhofu/Mpofu, Dziva/Siziba, Garwe/Ngwenya/
eoena. Siziba, Moyo, Mbeva, Gumbo, Bonga, Shoko, Gudo/Choeni.

samal Totem it represents

ee oe
a Coa
fen

a

Reems are important. In African tradition, people with the same totem aré related.
Brems help people to find their relatives. It is not allowed for people with the same
‘em to get married as they are said to be related. Totems make people respect
Sach other and be united because they believe they are one family.

Exercise 3

Ans wer all the questions.

Family names can be called

What is your family name and totem?

in our Zimbabwean culture all people with the same totem are related. True
or false?

Fillin the table on totems on the next page by matching the symbol and the
correct totem.

5. Cut out pictures of the named symbol and paste them or draw them in your

note books.

ta ta

be



--- Page 10 ---
Symbol
elephant

Summary

¢ Every family member has a role to play.

* Nuclear, mMOnogamous, polygamous, child-headed and one parent families
are all types of families found in Zimbabwe.

* People have family names and these are known as surnames.

¢ People identify themselves by totems.

¢ Those with the same totems are regarded as relatives.

Glossary

- someone who belongs to a group

- being maried to more than one person at a time
a duty or a function

- a symbol (animal, bird, limb or object) representing one’s
family identity, for example, Shumba/Sibanda

= Z

Multiple choice questions

. One type of a family is .
A. extended B. monogamous C. rich D. poor
. Afamily name is called a .
A. totem name B. symbol name C. praisename D. surname
. Your father's father is your .
A. grandfather B. uncle C. grandparents D. grandmother
. In Zimbabwe one is a child when below the age of ‘
A. fifteen B. sixteen C. seventeen OD. eighteen
. Most families are called by their surname.
A. father’s B. mother's C. friend's D. neighbour's
. is amember of the family.
A. Mealie B. Mother Cc. Cat D. Family
. Aman with more than one wife is called a ____
D. child-headed

A. nuclear B. monogamist C. polygamist



--- Page 11 ---
m Dmbabwe people can also be identified by their .

& totem B. families C. dressing D. aunts

People of the same totem are not allowed to each other.

& visi B. talk to Cc. marry D. see
"a mother's mother is my .

& agrandmother — B. uncle C. grandfather D. aunt

Structured questions

= all the questions below.
Whot is your family name?

Werte one role of a parent.

My fotem is .

According to our Zimbabwean constitution, a child is someone below the

L “oge of .

ilies

tame two types of families you have learnt about.

dd



--- Page 12 ---
4
a

|

Unit2 Family and religion

In this unit you will:
1. identify the religious activities that bring families together

2. state family religions
3. explain the religious ways of life in a family.

Background

It is everyone's right to belong to a religion. Different family members belong to
different religions. In Zimbabwe it is a right that is given by the government to
belong to a religion of one's choice. These diiferent religions have activities that
bring unity in the family. Do you still remember the four types of religions you learnt?
Now we are going to learn more on the religions.

Key words

unity ceremonies __ initiation baptism belief rites ritual

2A. Family unity
i) Ceremonies
Indigenous religion



--- Page 13 ---
g to
wt fo
that
wnt?

Ceremonies are occasions when people celebrate a particular event. There are
many ceremonies which bring families together. In the Indigenous religion people
“ave beliefs. A belief is something that one accepts as true or real and has trust
anc faith i in it. In Indigenous religion, families come together for weddings, funerals,
sooeasing the spirit/ukuthethela amadlozi/kupira mudzimu, and the rain making
>=remony/mukwerera/ukucela izulu. Kurova guva/umbuyiso is a ceremony
D=J<ved to bring the spirit of a deceased person home.

= *he ceremony mentioned last, relatives of the deceased brew some beer and
some even kill a cow in honour of their dead relative. In the early hours of the
-_ owing morning the elders go to the deceased's grave. Daughters- in-law carry
s2=r containers on their heads. On the way to the grave yard people will be
enaing. The whole process is led by the deceased's relatives.

Te elders spill beer on the grave whilst talking to the ancestors. After this all the
Le ople go back home. When this is done it is believed the spirit of the deceased
o=son is back home to protect the family and help them prosper. All family
members should attend this ceremony.

Christianity

SersSianity there are many ceremonies that bring about family unity for example,
“stmas, Easter, weddings and funerals. Unity is when people come together

| snd live in peace. Christmas is celebrated by some Christians. They celebrate the

dirth of Jesus on the twenty-fifth of December every year. When Jesus Christ wes
porn, three wise men from the east visited him. They brought some gifts. Christmas
time is believed to be a time of giving. On 25 December the Christian communes
enjoy themselves. They dance to music. They have special food and Grin«s. Most

=< << SLL ee

a


--- Page 14 ---
buy new clothing. They visit different places of interest. It is time also fo give fo the
underprivileged, disadvantaged, old people's homes. orphanages, hospitals and
many others. Easter is celebrated in April. On a good Friday, Christians remember
the death of Jesus Christ. They gather at churches sharing the word.

=e FF — Po Go ee

Weddings | are celebrated by Christians. Some go to church to celebrate the
event. People gather and celebrate together with jhe bride and the groom. They
eat, drink and dance together. Christians celebrate weddings together because
they believe it is the right thing to do. In the bible there is a story of a wedding that
took place in Cana. Jesus also celebrated with them. People ate and drank wine.

Judaism



--- Page 15 ---
=p o!s0 a number of ceremonies in the Jewish religion. These are circumcision
oeby boys. Passover and the feast of the trumpets. Jews celebrate the
= J=wish initiation is also celebrated by the Jews. Initiation is the introduction
ome to join a particular group or activity. During initiation, Jews mark the
sentry into God's covenant with Abraham.

> to the
als and
ember

i =" marks the day when Israelites were released from slavery (Exodus 7). The
were made slaves in Egypt. God saw the suffering of the Israelites. He sent
*0 Pharaoh to tell him to release them. Pharaoh refused. God became
and sent the ten plagues to Egypt. Pharaoh released the Israelites after the
miogue. It was very painful that all the first born boys of Egypt were killed.
me *he killings,,God spared the first borns of the Israelites, “passing over" their
s hence the name of the holiday “passover". Pharaoh then chased the
=< away. The Israelites left and their journey to Canaan began.

Passover feast is celebrated in the evening of the fourteenth day of the
mnonth. During this feast they sacrifice the lamb to the Lord, marking their
werance from slavery, under Egyptians. They eat bread without yeast. The story
Spend in the Old Testament in the book of Exodus.

£id Al-Fitr is called the “Feast of fast breaking.” It marks the end of Ramadan, the
month of fasting. During Ramadan, Muslims are not allowed to eat and drink from
dawn to sunset. They are also not allowed fo smoke. Ramadan is celebrated in
“ne ninth month of Iskamic Lunah Calendar. The new moon of the tenth month is
wnen Eid Al-Fitr starts.

_


--- Page 16 ---
During this festival, the Muslims conduct communal prayers early in the morning.
Prayers are held in the mosque or in open spaces outside their town. People also
take time to give to the poor or less fortunate. Gifts are exchanged.

Activity 1

State similarities and differences of religions.

Exercise 1

Answer all the questions.
. The religion brings back the spirit of the dead.
celebrate Easter.
Passover is celebrated to mark the day when Israelites were released from

What does Eid Al-Fitr mean?
List three things that Muslims are not allowed to do during Ramadan.

ii) Rituals and rites

Indigenous religion

A ritual is a religious ceremony performed according to orders given and a rite
is a religious ceremony practiced by people. In Indigenous religion it is important
to unite a family as everything is done in unity. Relatives from the mother's and
father's family are all invited to any religious event. Weddings, funerals, appeasing
the spirit and the rain making ceremony are some of the rituals and rites that
Indigenous religion practices.

Christianity

Christians believe that they are all a big family. Baptism is a Christian religious
rite of sprinkling water on the forehead or dipping them in water. Parents and
relatives may not attend baptism or communion but other Christians will be there
to celebrate with a member of their church. During weddings everyone is invited
including relatives, friends and neighbours. Christians say we should cry with those |
who are crying and celebrate with those who are celebrating. |

Judaism

Judaism is a religion that came from one ancestor, Abraham. Family unity is very
important to them. All ceremonies, rituals and rites are done in the presence of
family members. The Judaism care for the dead from when they die until they are
buried. They also practice the rite of circumcision after a baby boy has lived for
eight days after birth and they name the child. The Jews also conduct wedding


--- Page 17 ---
1g.
ISO

ite
Int
nd

e=monies. The ritual of redemption is one of the Jews practice. This is when the
ies Dorn boy child is made to give their life to service in the temple.

om

Wlost ceremonies, rituals and rites are done when all family members are present.
The Muslims have practices such as prayers. The prayers have specific times when
Sey are performed which are dawn, noon, mid-afternoon, sunset and at night.
The Muslims fast during the Ramadan, at this time they are not allowed to eat from
sawn to sunset. They also perform rituals such as walking around ka'bah, this is to
s=rform rite of the pilgrimage. It is done so that they spend their time worshipping

~~

and asking for forgiveness from God.

Answer all the questions.
bring families together.
All family members should be present when performing ceremonies and
rituals in the religion.
Which animal is killed when bringing the spirit of the dead?
Which religion believes that people should cry with those who cry?
List two ceremonies that are celebrated in the indigenous families.

pa

Oy be Go

2B. Family life in religion

i » | Pox

— ee



--- Page 18 ---
Families have different religions. Some families believe in the Indigenous religion,
Christianity, Isham and Judaism. Every child is born into a family religion. If born
to a Muslim family the child becomes a Muslim. Children take up the religion of
their families until they are adults. Each family member has a role to play in their
religion. In Indigenous religion the father is the leader. Every member of the family
has his or her role and there is unity when children listen to their elders.

Indigenous religion

Family is important in Indigenous religion. All members of the family participate in
religion though in different ways. It is the fathers who often talk to the ancestors
whilst the mother and children clap in agreement. The mothers brew beer for
religious activities. and children are included in all activities.

Christianity

In Christianity the father is the head of the family and makes decisions. He works
hard to provide for the family. The mother takes care of the base and the children.
Children are taught to obey their mother, father and elders. Children should grow
up in a loving family. A family has a married father and mother who respect each
other. Christianity teaches us to do good to one another. Families can teach the
community how to live together in unity forgiving each other when we hurt each
other. Families should work hard and take care of the elderly, orphans and the
underprivileged.

Islam

Muslim families usually stay together. They teach both men and women to take
good care of their families. Muslims teach their children to be generous but punish
them when they do wrong.

Judaism

In Judaism children are taught to memorise the Torah from an early age. People
are encouraged to work hard and obey the scriptures for Yahweh to bless them.
All members of the family participate in religion.

Activity 2

1. List the roles of a husband in a family.
2. List the roles of a wife in a family.

Exercise 3

Answer all the questions
1. Children should be brought up in a family.
2. and should respect each other's roles within a marriage.
3. Muslim families usually together.
4, can set an example for children how to live a Christian life.



--- Page 19 ---


--- Page 20 ---
Families have different religions. Some families believe in the Indigenous religion,
Christianity, Iskam and Judaism. Every child is born into a family religion. If born
to a Muslim family the child becomes a Muslim. Children take up the religion of
their families until they are adults. Each family member has a role to play in their
religion. In Indigenous religion the father is the leader. Every member of the family
has his or her role and there is unity when children listen to their elders.

Indigenous religion

Family is important in Indigenous religion. All members of the family participate in
religion though in different ways. It is the fathers who often talk to the ancestors
whilst the mother and children clap in agreement. The mothers brew beer for
religious activities and children are included in all activities.

Christianity

In Christianity the father is the head of the family and makes decisions. He works
hard to provide for the family. The mother takes care of the base and the children.
Children are taught to obey their mother, father and elders. Children should grow
up in a loving family. A family has a married father and mother who respect each
other. Christianity teaches us to do good to one another. Families can teach the
community how to live together in unity forgiving each other when we hurt each
other. Families should work hard and take care of the elderly, orphans and the
underprivileged.

Islam

Muslim families usually stay together. They feach both men and women to take
good care of their families. Muslims teach their children to be generous but punish
them when they do wrong.

Judaism

In Judaism children are taught to memorise the Torah from an early age. People
are encouraged to work hard and obey the scriptures for Yahweh to bless them.
All members of the family participate in religion.

Activity 2

1. List the roles of a husband in a family.
2. List the roles of a wife in a family.

Exercise 3

Answer all the questions

1. Children should be brought up ina family.
2 and should respect each other's roles within a marriage.

3. Muslim families usually together.
4 can set an example for children how to live a Christian life.



--- Page 21 ---
religion
.. If bor
sligion
y in thes
je family

Dorm summer other members of the community like

cipate in
yncestor
beer fo

entity different types of families found in Zimbabwe. Each and
Sct out from the community or any source. They choose a project
we. The secretary compiles all types of families mentioned in class and
(erent sources. Class puts information in a file.

S== are different religions in all communities.
The vorous religions have different ways of worshipping God.
nurt EAC W=eni religions call God in different names.
d th sme religious activities and ceremonies help in bringing families together.
pan shovid be brought up in a loving and supportive family.

each the

in to take
put punist

— to do something enjoyable in order to show that an
occasion or event is special.

— alarge meal, usually for special occasions.

— therelationship between two people who are husband and
wife.

- belief in a God or gods.

— the occasion on which Jesus Christ was brought back to life

after his death, according to the Christian religion.

the system of owning someone as a slave.

to live in poverty

2. People
less them.

Multiple choice questions

1. One of the rights of an individual is

A. to belong to a religion of one's choice

B *o choose the type of family one would like to belong to
©. to choose what to eat

DB *o vote at the age of sixteen

jarriage.

ife.



--- Page 22 ---
in the family.

Religious activities bring

A. freedom of speech B. unity
C. music and dance D. relatives
3. One example of a religious activity that brings families together is
A. ngozi B. a feast
C. circumcision D. kurova guva/umbuyiso
4. visited when Jesus was born.
A. Angels B. Wise men
C. The fen virgins D. The disciples
5. The Passover marks the deliverance of the Israelites from
A. slavery , B. the Red Sea
C. King David D. King Saul
6. The book in the bible that tells of the Israelites' story of living in slavery is
A. Genesis B. Exodus C. Deuteronomy  D. Numbers
7. Muslims are not allowed to during Ramadan.
A. fast B. wash their hands
Cc. eat, drink or smoke D. marry
8. A place of worship for the Jews is a .
A. church B. shrine C. mosque D. synagogue
9. Jesus was baptised in .
A. the Mediterranean Sea B. the Jordan River
C. the Black sea D. the Red sea
10. All the major religions in Zimbabwe believe in
A. life after death B. baptism
C. many Gods D. Jesus Christ the saviour
11. The feast that marks the end of Ramadan is called
A. the feast of fast breaking B. the Feast of Lights
C. the feast of Passover D. the feast prayer
12. The country in which the Israelites stayed as slaves is .
A. Canaan B. Arabia Cc. Syria D. Egypt

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

Name the religion which you belong to.
A rain making ceremony is celebrated in which religion?
Some Christians celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ at
Name two Jewish ceremonies that unite the family.
Four books in the Bible are called Gospels. Name them.

AkwNn>



--- Page 23 ---
3 Family and community

™s unit you will:

Gerry family roles in the community

GSmonstrate family roles in the community
2 Gifferent ways of helping the needy

==>aIn ways of helping the needy.

———— —
Pe

Smground

members do different tasks and chores. It is im
“asks or roles among its members. Families also
‘xe care of the needy in their communities.

portant for a family to share
play roles in the community.

Key words

caring community — inter-relationship _relative

Family roles in the community

ry's family community roles



--- Page 24 ---
In communities people come together to work. They help each other when they
are in need. During the time of ploughing and harvesting they work together so
that work becomes easier and faster. In times of droughi they may have gardens
where vegetables are grown. The vegetables are grown using irrigation.

Communities also work together to sell vegetables and crops. The money is used
in improving their community. The money may be used to build a school, drill a
borehole and make roads. Some families in the community take underprivileged
or poor people and stay with them in their homes.

Henry's family helps the community when there is need. Father helps by
building homes, digging, ploughing and fencing the yard. His wife is known to
help by cooking, washing and cleaning the house. The children also help the
disadvantaged people by giving them food and clothes.

It is everyone's wish to be praised for work well done. The praise can be from
family, friends, schoolmates or the community. A family does not live alone. It lives
within the community. A community is a group of people living in the same place
and having things in common. For example, the picture shows what Henry's family
does to contribute to the community. When there are activities people come
together as a community and help each other. For example, when building,
ploughing, harvesting and celebrating ceremonies. Men usually have difficult
roles that need power like digging and building. Women come together in the
community to cook, wash and fetch firewood.

Exercise 1

Answer all the questions.
1. Two ways in which Henry’s family contributes to its community are

and .

A. building and cooking B. cleaning houses and washing
C. teaching children and digging D. helping the disadvantaged
A family lives within the __.

A. school B. community

Cc. parliament D. government

Whenever there is drought people can do farming using

A. rain B. community

C. irrigation D. building

Name one role that men do in the community.

List two activities that women do in the community.

Field work. Visiting families and working in the community.
In groups, you list ways of helping in the community.



--- Page 25 ---
3B. Caring for the needy

Gearing means being kind to others. People need to care for each other. In our
Pactonal custom we are taught that everyone in the community is a relative. A
WBistve is someone whom you have arelation with and you may be connected by
poo or marriage. There are inter-relationships to all people in an area especially
2 vrai set up. Inter-relationship means the connection or link that people have
mia Dow they associate with each other. It makes it easier for people to help
gah oiher.

Sore supposed to help the homeless like the street kids. They sleep in the street
©. under the bridge, in old buildings and on pavements. They do not have
ean to give them clothes, food, love and parental care. We can help them by
mmc “nem food, clothes, money or shelter for them to stay.

= also help the orphans in our communities. These are children who have
= So parents. Some orphans are kept in orphanages or children's homes. This

|me where children with no parents are kept. Children lose their parents in
=> ways. Some parents have died in accidents and some have fallen sick
pec. We have health workers who also help the poor and even those that
HmPected with HIV and AIDS. They give them food and educate people on
BS Pealthy foods.

=o people's homes cater for the old aged and anyone who is willing can

pmare to the old people’s home by giving them food, clothes, blankets and
mrey. People also visit the sick in hospitals and pray for them. People show that
core and love each other when they visit the sick. They also help people with

Beorments.



--- Page 26 ---
There was a man called Jairos Jiri wno had a passion for helping the disabled
and the blind. He taught them different skills to be able to do their own things
and survive. He believed that disability does not mean inability. Disabled people
can do work that is done by able bodied people. Jairos Jiri taught the disabled
to make different items using their hands. He helped the disabled and everyone
was happy about the work he was doing. The handicapped have been taught
to play sports, make artefacts and play music. The blind have learnt to read the
braille. The deaf and dumb are taught to communicate using the sign language.
The Jairos Jiri centre is a place known for keeping the disabled and the blind and
it was named after the founder, Jairos Jiri.

In a certain village in*Hwange, there lived a group of boys and girls. They decided
to come together and spend their time in good use since they were unemployed.
They decided to help people in the community in different ways depending on
one's need. They helped in cleaning some utensils, watering the gardens, giving
some little money, food and clothes. They would also help child-headed families
in giving words of advice so that they do not feel lonely and neglected. The group
set a good example to other people in the community.

Besides helping the community in material things, they formed a drama group.
They focused their drama on HIV/AIDS, cancer, child albuse, gender and social
issues. People and peer groups learnt a lot from them.

Exercise 2

Answer all the questions.
The group was made of boys and
The story happened in .
They later formed a group.
During dramatisation they focused on HIV/AIDS, child abuse, gender and

Did the community admire this group?

What did the group members have in common?
Name one disadvantaged group you know.
Give one example of a needy person
Inter-relationships exist in Our

Activity 2

In your own groups, find out about some of the orphanages and old people's
homes in Zimbabwe.

Name the founders of the orphanages and old people's homes.

List them Gown and read them to the class.

As a class, list down people who need help in your community.

3

et
:

& 4 he bo PS

ol
ps



--- Page 27 ---
led

ings
>pld — all the questions.
sled ). Acerson whose parents have passed away is called an
one za. home where orphans are kept is called an
yght 3 Besides orphans, which other group of people is kept in homes?
the = Name one place where the disabled are kept.
ge. S ust down one cause of death which makes a child to be an orphan.
and & Nome one course or life skill that can be done by a physically handicapped
person.
Ff. From your own point of view, is it good or bad to give money to a person
ded who lives in the streets? Why?
yed.
3 on
vINg
nilies
OUP 1. Go fora tour and visit a place where the needy are cared for.
2 Find out what assistance they get from the community.
OUP.
cial

Summary

= A family exists within the community.

* Families have roles to play in the community.

* Families participate in what other families do in the community.

= Families help the less privileged found in their localities.

* Some families or individuals take care of the needy and stay with them in their
nomes.

one who cannot see.
= one who cannot hear.

- handicap, either physically or mentally.

— one who cannot speak.

— the fact that a part of your body is unable to do something
fully.


--- Page 28 ---
End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions
1. Caring means being

A. rude
B. kind
5 Cc. honest
D. good
2. One disadvantaged person in the community is .
" A. achild — B. agirlchild C. anorphan D. aboy child
3. A family which is headed by a child is called a family.
A. polygamous B. child-headed
C. children D. monogamous
4. Women in communities help by .
A. painting B. cooking Cc. hunting D. digging
5. Children who live in the street are called .
A. orphans B. kids C. disabled D. street kids
6. We should all help the .
A. poor B. schools Cc. homes D. rich
7. Anorphanage is a home for .
; A. old people B. street people
Cc. orphans D. the dead
8. Complete the statement, “Disability does not mean "
A. ability B. the blind
C. the sick D. inability
9, The Jairos Jiri helps the .
A. disabled B. family Cc. church D. rich
10. An old people's home is a home for .
A. grandfathers B. grandmothers
C. very old people D. poor people

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

_ Explain why some people are called less privileged.

_ Is it good or bad to help other people? Why?

_ Where is Jairos Jiri's home?

_ Name two groups of people who need help.

_ List two self-help projects that can be done by people with physical
impairment.

OP WN —



--- Page 29 ---
Unit 4 Social and emotional learning

1. explain the importance of managing oneself
2. justify the need to control emotions
3. state the role played by religion in self-management.

Background

Self-management is one of the most important things because it reflects who you
are. Previously you discussed and explained ‘self-awareness’ that is, knowing one
self. You also discussed how one reacts to different situations, it can be a positive
or negative reaction. You looked at one's actions towards others and how those
reactions affect other people's lives. Now you are going to look at how such
reactions or emotions can be managed. /

Key words

anger coward self-management

4A. Self-management

I) Self-management

Self-management is controlling oneself. It involves taking responsibility for one's
actions and well-being. If the victim turns a bad situation into a more positive
event, then we say he or she has self-control. Self-management helps us to avoid
=onflict. When the heat of an emotion is gone, bad feelings offen pass away as
well. Hence it is important not to make decisions when anary.

tome people do not control themselves especially where there are many people
sround. They fear to be labelled as cowards. A coward is a person who is afraid
of pain and danger.

Ssople may end up being arrested when they fail fo control their emotions. The
Soliceman arrest people who commit crime and send them to jail. They work to

“al -aintain order and peace. People who fight and kill each other because they
e©onnot control themselves are arrested.



--- Page 30 ---
«~

We have all been made angry at one time or another. Reasons for us getting angry
are different. What makes Mr Kushinga angry does not make Mr Ncube angry.

Killian gets into a fight

One day two friends Tavonga and Killian were going to the shops. They were
chatting happily. Some people were walking merrily. One of them bumped inte
Killian by mistake. Killian did not even ask why he had bumped into him. He did not
give that boy a chance fo say sorry. Killian immediately beat the boy and a figh®
broke up. They fought for a while. Killian was injured and taken to the clinic. They
were both arrested.

At the police station they discovered that they were relatives. Killian was a nephew
to that boy. They regretted having fought. They reconciled and went back to their
homes. The most regrettable thing was that Killian hac lost an eye. What lesson de
you get from this story?

ii) Emotions

What would you do if one wrongs you purposefully? Would you let if pass? Let's see
how some people can deal with such a situation.

The bad boy

Themba was a very quiet and calm boy. He used to play alone at his home. One
day he made a very beautiful toy car using wire. He was so excited and knew
that other boys will praise him for that. He decided to go and play with other boys.
Being excited, he showed the car to his playmates. His friends were excited and
praised him for his art.


--- Page 31 ---
Ngry

One jealous boy, Hillary took the car by force. He crushed it and dismantled it.
Some children laughed at Themba. The other boys expected a fight. They called
Themba a coward. Themba was angry but controlled his temper. He collected
tne pieces of wire and went home. Hillary thought Themba was going to fight.
Themba kept quiet as if nothing had happened.

“You should make toys out of waste wire and display them in class.

Answer all the questions.
Themba was a very quiet boy. True/False

Themba made a very beautiful foy out of wire. True/False

Hillary was not jealous at all. True/False

Hillary used to play alone at his home. True/False

The following day Themba fought Hillary. True/False

Did Themba show a good behaviour? Why do you say so?

Are you abie to control your temper as Themba did?

What should you do or say if you realise that you made someone angry?

>
(9)
ONO BW >

»)
Qs



--- Page 32 ---
iii) Role played by religion
Indigenous religion

Religion plays a role in our life. It is important because it moulds us. The reason for
that is to make people live in peace. It also helps to control one's anger. Anger
is a strong feeling of being cross. For example, when a wife and a husband have
quarrelled, they engage someone fo settle the matter. The person who is usually
consulted is an aunt, uncle, nephew or niece. If the matter is so serious then
the elders can be consulted. If the misunderstanding is between people in the
community, the kraal head is consulted or the headman. This is what is expected
from the Indigenous religion.

When settling the matter, they try by all means to be fair. If one is found to be
wrong he is made to pay a fine, for example, a goat or a cow to his rival. If the
headman fails then the matter is taken up to the chief. This is done so that the two
people do not fight physically, since fighting may cause injury or death. The chief
can fail to settle the conflict. If one of the rivals becomes so stubborn, then the
arm of the law can get involved.

Christianity

All religions believe in forgiving and reconciling. If one becomes angry, he or she
should not be angry forever. One should be able to manage his anger, forgive ang
reconcile. In Christianity, forgiving and reconciling are very important and peopl
are expected to practise them. There are many stories on forgiveness from the
Bible, for example, in the Lord's prayer in Mathew 6 verse 12, there is a statemer
which says, “Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.



--- Page 33 ---
When Jesus was on the cross he said, “Forgive them for they do not know what
they are doing.” Jesus was nailed on the cross for our sins to be forgiven by God.
jesus’ disciples asked him the number of times one should be forgiven. In Mathew
18 verse 22, Jesus replied, “seventy times seven times.” Which means we should
forgive each other many times. Christians are expected to practise forgiveness in
good faith. Christianity also teaches people that they should love everyone.

Judaism

= Judaism self-management is seen in Esau when he forgave his twin brother

sacob. This is found in Genesis 25. Though Esau was angry and wanted to kill his

orother, he controlled himself and later reconciled with him. Another story is of

joseph who forgave his ten brothers. The brothers had sold him to the Egyptians
ong back. On seeing him they could no longer recognise him. He forgave them

and accepted them in his land.

iam

When there is a conflict between two people and if they both want fo set things
foh*, Allah will bring about reconciliation between them. "Allah knows all, is well
awore of everything” (Quran 4:35). When elderly people fight in marriage they
s=tle matters with family or friends first. A member from the wife's side and a
member from the husband's side come together to resolve the conflict. In the
Mosiim religion the prophet's marriage sermon always teaches everyone about
© importance of unity in the family and maintaining strong ties with relatives.

Activity 2

ci out and list down the duties of a kraal head or headman.

Answer all the questions.

'. We should control and manage our . (anger, religion)
Z Allreligions believe in . (unforgiveness, forgiveness)
< | forgave his brothers. (Jacob, Joseph)
4  €sau's twin brother was . (Jacob, Isaac)
5 Their father was . (Moses, Isaac)

he & Why should we manage our emotions?

List down one instance of forgiveness in Christianity.
List down one instance of forgiveness in Judaism.

i



--- Page 34 ---
Project 2

in groups go out in the community. Approach some people from the community,
tell them about your plans of helping the family you have chosen. Ask for
donations, for example, from business people, churches. other organisations and
individuals. You should have a letter from the school authority which explains

your mission.

Steps of the project
* With the help of your teacher ask permission from your head to go to the

community. Be.accompanied by the letter from your school authority.

¢ In your groups go into the community asking for donations in kind, in cash
or in any other acceptable form. In every group choose a secretary for
recording the donations you receive.

* You should have a form designed in such a way that if someone donates
something he or she should write the item, his or her name, address and
signature.

* Put the donations together as a class.

* Go and give the donated items to a disadvantaged family of your choice.

Design a form whereby you write the items given to the family, the name of

the recipient, address and signature.

Summary

* Self-management is very important in one's life.
* Reactions of people differ when they are angry.
* Managing and controlling one's emotions is an acceptable behaviour among

people.
e Religions encourage self-control, forgiveness and reconciliation.

Glossary

Emotion — a feeling derived from one’s situation, mood, or relationship
with others. !

Forgive = to stop feeling angry or wish to punish someone for an:
offence or mistake.

Merrily — joyful and lively way.
Reconcile — to re-establish friendly relations.
Self-control controlling one's desire.



--- Page 35 ---
End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

policeman order and peace.
disrupts B. maintains CC. rejects D. takes
good friend is one who

gives bad advice B. encourages fighting
gives good advice D. encourages quarrelling
Ghrstians and Jews read the __——_in their places of worship.
A «Koran B. dictionary
<. novel D. Bible
You should forgive someone .
& manytimes B. atonce Cc. seven times D. twice
One should love
A neighbours only B. enemies only
©. friends only D. all people
is the prophet of Muslims.
A. Joseph B. Mohammed
c. Jesus D. Mbuya Nehanda
Christians believe in _.
A. Jesus B. Jacob Cc. Mohammed D. Isaac
Most religions encourage respect for .
A. prefects B. therich Cc. parents D. worshippers
_ Esau's twin brother was .
A. Matthew B. David Cc. Jacob D. Job
72. Moses ied the Israelites out of
A. Egypt B. Israel Cc. Palestine D. Canaan

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

Self-management is .

A person who commits crime is sent to .

Name two animals that are used to pay a fine in Indigenous religion.
How many times should you forgive a person that wrongs you?

In the Islam religion, who teaches about unity in the family?



--- Page 36 ---
Paper 1

A. polygamist
Cc. single man

A. ant

A. Methodist
7. People should
A. denounce

A. Christians

A. gossip

A. children

15. Marriage
A. unites

A. \slamic

17. Esau and Jacob
A. cousins

18. Esau
A. hated

Multiple choice questions

4. Amanwith one wife is called a

5. One of the animals which is a syM

8, People who follow Jesu

9. People whose religion is

13. One of the family role

Answer all the questions.
1. Father, mother and children make a

B. elephant

B. Anglican

Cc. family

A. grandparents B. neighbours
2. Types of families include family.
A. Jews. B. Islamic Cc. Hindu
3. activities bring families together.
A. Indigenous B. Religious Cc. Individual

TT
B. nuclearman

D. monogamist

bol of a totem is an

Cc. ostrich

6. In our communities we have different religions one of w

c. Islam

each other's religion.

oo
B. undermine
5' teachings are called

B. Muslims

B. play games

C. spirit mediums

families.
B. separates

16. Spirit mediums are associated with

B. Indigenous
were
B. relatives

B. forgave

iskam are called

s in the community is 70
C. help the needy

14. Some of the needy people are the .
B. handicapped

Cc. hate

Cc. Jews

A. Indigenous B. Christians Cc. Jews
10. Jews are people who believe in

A. Christianity B. Judaism c. Islam
11. Amosque is where pray.

A. Lutherans B. Muslims Cc. Christians
12. Jews pray in a .

A. temple B. church Cc. synagogue

D. women
Cc. identifies
Cc. Judaism

C. friends

Jacob and reconciled with him.

Cc. lied to

(1hr 30 minutes)
(50 marks)

D. friends
D. single parent

D. Neighbours

.

D. egg
hich is .
D. Evangelica

D. respect

D. Hindus
D. Muslims
D. ancestors
D. Jews

D. mosque

. go to the library

D. allows

religion.

D. Christianity
D. twins

D. chased



--- Page 37 ---
= ssohammed was a great prophet of the religion.
A. \siamic B. Christianity C. Indigenous D. Judaism

= We should love and respect people who are from US.
A. our friends only B. our relatives
c. different D. the same as US

- & child with no parents is called an .
A. orphan B. enemy Cc. aunt D. orphanage

» One orphanage found in Harare is the .

A. Jairos Jiri B. Chinyaradzo Children’s Home
Cc. old age’s home D. Nyaradzo Children's Home

Jairos Jiri was known for helping the .
A. orphans B. disabled
Cc. old people D. privileged
24. A permanent way of helping someone is to

A. give him money B. give him clothes

C. give him food D. sponsor his course OF self-help project
25. When one has been angered he or she should .
A. forgive B. play Cc. dance D. sing

~4 Jesus was in the wilderness for days.
A. 20 B. 30 Cc. 40 D. 50
> Muslims call God ;
A. Allah B. Torah c. God D. Jesus
28 Who helped Jesus to carry the cross?
A. Simon of Cyrene B. Peter
c. Andrew D. Paul
How many laws were given to Moses for the Israelites at Mount Sinai?
A. 6 B. 10 c. 8 D. 20
S@ Jesus was baptised in river .
A. Nile B. Zambezi C. Tigris D. Jordan
§)_ The Jewish people worship God in a place called .
A. Synagogue B. Temple c. Church D. Mosque
> jesus’ special friends were called
A. disciples B. friends Cc. God D. Peter
= The Christians’ place of worship is a .
A. church B. house Cc. group D. home
a Dumb people cannot ‘
A see B. walk c. dance D. talk
God created :
A. anaeroplane B. nature Cc. glass D. phone
Muslims pray times a day.
A 2 . Cc. D. 5
Christians use water for :
A abiution B. cleansing C. ritual washing D. baptism


--- Page 38 ---
+
. Jews use water for
A. Wudhu B. spiritual cleansing
| C. ritual washing D. washing
39. Ramadan is celebrated by the .
| A. Jews B. Christians
Bi C. Muslims D. Indigenous religion
40. Which religion believes we should cry with those who are crying?
= A. Judaism B. Islam
{ Cc. Christianity D. Indigenous religion
4]. The _ are taught to memorise the Torah.
A. Islam B. Judaism
Cc. Christians D. Jews
42. The blind read the ;
A. magazine 8. chart Cc. phone D. braille
43. When a person kills, he or she is sent to ‘
A. church B. jail Cc. school D. hospital
44. Jesus' home fown was .
A. Bethlehem B. Egypt Cc. Nazareth D. Canaan
45. What is the holy book of the Muslims?
A. Bible B. Vedas c. Koran D. Testament
46. Ramadan is the month when Muslims
A. harvest 5 fast
C. celebrate the birth of Mohammed D. read their noly books
47. The ‘kurova guva'/‘umbuyiso’ ceremony means
A. bringing the spirit home B. jealousy
Cc. anger D. respect and fear
48. ‘Allah’ is the name for God in .
A. Judaism B. Islam
C. Christianity D. Indigenous religion

49. Polygamy is when
A. amanstays with one wife always
B. amanhas more than one wife
C. a family has no mother or father
D. amanis divorced
50. An orphan is a child who :
A. has no brothers B. has no relatives
C. has no parents D. has no sisters

Structured questions

(1hr 30 minutes)

Paper 2
(30 marks)

Section A

aia all questions in this section.
. Lying is

> We should control our

(1]
(1)



--- Page 39 ---
)

[1]

oh in ts oy)

val

e.

on

J ‘
~ OO “sd

s

hot
—t

My father's mother is my [1]

if you have a you should find someone to ialk to. [i]
_ Anger is controlled so that people live with others. [1]
_ When a wife and a husband are in dispute they usually call an to

settle the matter. [1]

_ When two people or families in the community have a serious dispute

they first consult the . {1]
Why is fighting avoided in the community? [1]

_ Unscramble the word: corlnot {J
2. What is a family? [1]

Family member Role played

SL
a
SC

[5]

Digging and building is mostly done by . [1]
What is a community? [2]
A surname is a name. {1]
Amanwith more than one wife is called a . [1]
What do we calla child no parents? [1]

People with the same totem are allowed fo marry each other.
True or False? [1]

22. Name 5 animals used as totems. [5]
23. List 2ceremonies celebrated by Indigenous Religion. [2]
Section B (20 marks)

Th

ere are six questions. Answer any four.

_ a) What is an orphan? [1]

b) i. Do you think it is good for the old people to live in old people's [1]

ii. Why? [1]
c) One of the under-privileged groups of people is the . [1]
d) Write one way of helping the needy. [1]
a) Jairos Jiri centre is named after . [1]
b) What can you do for old people in an old people's home? [2]
c) In rural areas people can contribute to the construction of a school or

clinic by moulding . {1]



--- Page 40 ---
d) One who cannot hear and speak is said to be

3. a) We must our parents.
b) List any two rules at your school.
c) Whatisa temptation?
d) Who tempted Jesus?
4. a) Christians follow
b) The God of Muslims is
c) Muslims’ holy book is
d) Christians holy day is :
e) The holy book for Jews is called .
5. a) Name tworoles done by the fatherina family.
b) Which type of family has a father with three wives?
c) List two types of families you know.
6. a) Name three animals used as totems.
b) Whichreligion celebrates the rainmaking ceremony?
c) When is Christmas celebrated?

a

a



--- Page 41 ---
Religion

introduction

=o\th, beliefs and morals form one's religion. It is of great importance to belong fo
2 certain religion, as this guides and leads you in your daily life. Religion quides you
reorally and socially. You did religions in the family topic and learnt that at least
eoch and every person belongs to a religion.



--- Page 42 ---
Unit5 The concept of religion

1. identify different religions in the locality.

Background
You have done religions in the family. You learnt that each and every person
belongs to a religion. Having listed names of the Supreme Being, you now know

that most religions pray to one God through different names and ways.

Key words
religion upright

Concept of religion
ne believes and has faith in. li guides people to live an upright

Religion is what ©
d or right. Uprignt may mean honesty. This

life that is a life that people see as goo
also means that a person is guided by religion.

5A. Religion in the community



--- Page 43 ---
ferent religions

We have different religions. We have learnt about the Indigenous, Christianity,
scaism and Islam religions. These religions have similarities and differences. They
a! oelieve that families are important and they also believe in family love. Every
#d is born in a religious family but some have a righi to choose if they want to
ontinue believing in what their parents believe in or they may follow a different
eigion.

Exercise ]

¥ person
Iw know

=! in the table below.

Religion Symbol

Christianity
ndigenous
Zeligion
sam

Judaism

Activity 1
-uprigh
ssty. This

Bring pictures of different places of worship,
Using ICT tools draw a Mosque, church and a synagogue.

;

Each and every person belongs to a religion.
Most religions pray to one Almighty God through different names and ways.
Religion is what one believes and has faith in.

* There are four main religions in Zimbabwe, namely Christianity, Indigenous
religion, Isham and Judaism.

on based on the ideas of Jesus Christ.
- to have trust in something.
= that which has been in a/place for along time before other
people came to live there.
— the religion based on the ideas of Muhammed.
— the religion of Jewish people, based on the writings of the
' — Torah.



--- Page 44 ---
Unit 6: Indigenous religion

SONA PWN

state the origin of the religion

explain its historical background

list the roles of ancestors

explain the roles of ancestors

name family ancestors

name and sing spiritual songs

identify musical instruments in Indigenous religion

demonstrate dances performed at spiritual functions in the community
identify practitioners in Indigenous Religion

. name the duties of practitioners in Indigenous religion
. describe the attire of practitioners in Indigenous religion
. describe the key teachings in Indigenous Religion regarding the Supreme

deity

. explain the role of ancestral spirits in Indigenous religion
. identify various foods in indigenous diet

. describe how indigenous foods are prepared

. state foods eaten during ceremonies/festivals

. describe how ceremonial foods are prepared

. define the term taboo

. state some common taboos in Indigenous religion

. explain the importance of taboos.



--- Page 45 ---
Background

nave learnt about religions. Now you are going to learn about the Indigenous
son. You will learn about its origins, background and the roles of ancestors. The
=, +2achings on food laws, taboos and religious praciitioners are to be learnt. You
» also learn about how people in Indigenous religion carry out religious activities.
es. now know different religions within families, the way they worship and names
y give to the Almighty. Let's find further information about these religions.

ity

Historical background

digenous religion, God, or the Supreme Being, is seen as the creator and
se<*oiner of the universe.

upreme |

ording to the Indigenous religion way of worshiping, there is a close relationship
~=ween the dead and the living. it is believed that when people die their spirit

=- with the living. Ancestors are guardians and go between the living people
‘onc God. They protect and bless the living. Death is seen as a way to join the

estors.

ne living break a moral law they are punished by the dead. Ancestors visit the
ina in dreams and visions to guide and talk to them. In the Indigenous religion
secestors play an important role in families as they are the ones who assist
meople to communicate with God. Whenever they need something they pray
=r assistance from Musikavanhu/Umdali/Leza/M udzimu/Qamatha as they usually
-=5 their God. They believed long back when people were hungry, they would go
oder a fig tree and ask for food. It is believed that the ancestors would visit local
=mmunities through someone in dreams and visions to give specific orders, that
*a\ling them what to do and not to do.

4B. Roles of ancestors

D) Ancestors and their roles in the family

Dan ancestor is one from whom a person is descended, whether on the father’s
+ mother's side at any distance of time. People communicate with God (Mwoar/
onkulunkulu/Mulungu/Chiuta wakuchanga) through the ancestors, vadzimu
Shona), or amadiozi (Ndebele). The vadzimu/amadlozi are believed to be par of



--- Page 46 ---
the living family. The dead celebrate with the living and care for them all the time
even when people are crying they also cry with them. Spirit mediums communicate
with the ancestors (vadzimu/amadlozi) on behalf of the people.

In Shona religion, in addition to the guarding characteristics of the ancestors, there
are also avenging or evil spirits, (ngozi) and witches who communicate with them.
The ngozi are, briefly, the spirits of deceased people who were greatly wronged,
neglected, mistreated or killed anyone. The spirits attack through sudden death

1 of several members of the same family, or through illness of people failing to
; respond to treatment. The ngozi causes death of many family members as a way
of revenge.

li) Family ancestors

The Indigenous religion has no holy book hence what people want to know
about the spiritual world and God is passed on by word of mouth. People believe
that they should belong to a religion. Therefore, they visit old people usually
grandparents and the wise people or the traditional leaders to hear more about
this religion. They provide spiritual guidance and protect the family. They are a
source of history and they give blessings. They are regarded as the ones who bring
fortunes and misfortunes in a family. This means the family believes that when all
things are going well in the family the ancestors are happy. When people start
facing problems, they believe the ancestors are not happy.

Activity 1

1. In groups, learners talk about Indigenous religion.
2. Research on family trees and trace their origin.

Answer all the questions.

1. founded Indigenous religion. (No one, Ancestors)

2. Indigenous ‘eligionis passed from generation to generation through
(books, word of mouth.)
People who follow Indigenous religion call the Almighty by the name
(Jehovah, M usikavanhu/Umadali)

Ancestors have roles to play in the family. True/False)
What is your religion?

List down two names of the religions you have learnt.
Draw two religious symbols.



--- Page 47 ---
different ethnic groups. An ethnic group is a community of
same cultural background and usually these people are
? ethnic groups in Zimbabwe are the Ndebele, Tonga, Shona,
mm. *ne Venda and the Suthu.

0)

‘sem goirituci songs and dances. Examples of spiritual songs are
si) Nhemamusasa (Mhondoro munaSave) and umaNcube

he songs they know from indigenous religion
=
Semomwa munazambezi
wWhondoro dzinomwa
Dzinomwa munaSsave
“#hondoro dzinomwa
Ndebele
wWemaNcube! Vumelani isangoma
| wemaNcube waya ngaphi?
Yumelani isangoma
Bathi kusasa nguMgqibelo

Vumelani isangoma



--- Page 48 ---
=
'

in Indigenous religion there are different types of instruments used as people sINg
and dance. Common instruments are mbira, hosho (rattles), ngoma/ingungu
(drums), Clappers and magavhu (leg rattle) and the human voice. Songs and
dances are a spiritual act. They are performed ai different ceremonies and are
often used as a means to pass on information on important events of history and
culture to the next generation. Different dances and songs are performed at
different religious ceremonies. The table below shows some of the popular dances
and when they are performed.

Dance

jJerusarema

Occasion
Marriage ceremony. funeral. festivals, celebrations

Ancestral ceremonies such as bira
Ancestral ceremonies and harvest

SIO [in preparation for war and cflerwar _____|

ioe (eee
and many social gatherings

fingquzy Social gatherings

Amabhiza Social gatherings



--- Page 49 ---
_ -
|
ol _ =
se =x

~= dances performed at spiritual functions in the community.

= Ps

eiicious procttionerss

ple sing
Ingungu
ngs and
and are
ory and
rmed at
‘dances

Religious practitioners in Indigenous Religion

Se -eigious practitioners in Zimbabwe include the chiefs, spirit mediums and
sonal healers. They work in a manner that brings back the traditional aspects
2 community. The chiefs’ duties are to maintain order and behaviour of the
sole in the community. They are the people who enforce the law. If one does
ong. he or she is brought to the chief. Some people pay a fine for failing to follow

- =nd Jaws. The traditional healers, also known as n ‘angas/inyanga consult the

= mediums when treating people.

=

~s= are the most respected people in an area. If people want to perform some

s they inform the chief. If a stranger or visitor comes in an area the chief is

=ddings od | IN
Seemed. |t is the duty of the chief to see that his pecople live in peace together.



--- Page 50 ---
ii) Duties of practitioners
Religious practitioner Attire Duties
Chief = Works in a manner
; that restores the

traditional aspects
of the Zimbabwean
community. Maintains
order and sanity.

Spirit medium Communicating
with ancestral spirits,
leading spiritual
ceremonies, seeking
knowledge for future

Traditional healer . | Healing with herbs,
seeking knowledge
for the future

Activity 4

1. Describe the attire worn by chiefs, spirit medium and traditional healers.
2. Discuss their duties stating their differences and similarities.

Exercise 2

Answer True/False for questions 1 to 5.
Songs are sung for different reasons.
There are different songs for different dances.
Traditional songs pass on information to the next generation.
Nhemamusasa is a traditional song.
We have books for Indigenous religion.
Give two names of dances practiced in Zimbabwe.
Give one type of ceremony practiced in Zimbabwe.
State one song sung at ceremonies.



--- Page 51 ---
6E. Key teachings

Ss
on
tains

‘ 4)

i) Nature of the supreme being \ a
ndigenous religions believe in one Supreme Being: Mwari/u kulunkulu, he has
sitferent names that show his characteristics. Mwari is also known ds Musikavanhu/
Jmdali. He is the creator of man and all nature. The Supreme Being is almighty

therefore, people cannot talk to him directly. They talk to God through ancestral

<pirits which are believed to pass On the message until if reaches the Creator
usikavanhu/Umdali/Leza/Mulungy).

The family talk to the ancestors together. Usually this is done in the rural kifchen
oy the home altar (chikuva). The father will snuff and place some on the floor
sear the altar. He will talk to the ancestors whilst the mother and children clap in

agreement.

ii) Roles of ancestral spirits

-q misfortune happens such as a disease, an unexpected death, an accident, or
sven unemployment, people try to interpret it as a Message from the ancestors.
# no act against the law can be found, it might be that an evil spirit haunts the
~ogmmunity or a witch is af work. Spirit mediums are the spiritual leaders that revea
tne cause of a misfortune and give a sign on how to bring back things to norman



--- Page 52 ---
mples of indigenous foods are shownin the diagram
above. Most foods are prepared using the boiling method for relish, tomatoes are
then added. Pumpkin leaves (muboora/ibhobola), dried vegetables (mufushwa/
umfushwa), rice (mupunga/ilayisi) and biltong (nyama yakaomeswa/umhwabha]
can be cooked in peanut butter. Okra (derere/idelele) is prepared using soda.
Some flying insects like (ishwa/izinhlwa) are fried and eaten with or without sadza.

Foodis what we eat or drink. Exa

Food eaten at ceremonies includes home brewed beer (mahewu/amahewy),
sadza, meat, beans, chicken and other foods depending on the community.
Sadza can be made from rapoko, millet, sorgnum or maize meal. There are also
different types of indigenous fruits that include nhunguru/umgokolo, matufu/
umviyo, nhengeni/umkhuna, mazhanje/umhobohobo, nyii/umnyi, baobab to
mention a few. Meatin this religion is usually obtained through hunting wild animals.
Ceremonial foods are usually prepared at the place where the ceremony is to be
held. Usually daughters-in-law of the family holding the ceremony prepare the

food. The beer is prepared by old women.

Activity 5

1. Collect various types of indigenous food.
2. Group them in their food groups.



--- Page 53 ---
ram
are
wa/
ha)
da.
za.

vu),
nity.
aikie)
Jfu/
Bie)
als.
‘be
the

sercise 3

#= all the questions.
What is food?
what is the role of the traditional healer?
Coan an evil spirit haunt a family?
+ow do people view misfortunes?
Name one flying insect that is eaten.
Sadza can be prepared from maize, sorghum or __
Name one type of food that can be prepared in ‘peanut butter.
Name one wild fruit you know.

. Taboos

& taboo is a religious
* that does not allow
3 particular practice. It
esomething one is not
imwed to do because of
ain religious or social
=csons. Taboos were set
® oace so as to preserve
@ecce and the well-being
@ ceople in the society.
hm me Zimbabwean
mehcenous religion, people
are expected to eat whilst
ging. Children should not
tok whilst eating or drinking
~woter. Leftover food should
mot be thrown away hence people eat 'munya/ilaja’. Munya is leftover sadza
at is eaten on the following day. A particular day is set apart every week for
people to rest and this day is termed ‘Chisi'. People are not allowed to work on
“chisi’ as this is said to bring bad luck.

usted below are some taboos found in the Indigenous religion.

1_ Sitting in the road.

Walking in reverse.

Marrying in November will result in the breaking of the marriage.

Working on ‘Chisi’ makes the ancestors angry and the offender should pay a
fine to the chief/kraal head.

Talking about striking of lightning when there is lightning and thunder.

Singing when cooking.

Standing whilst elders are sitting down.

insulting parents will cause some misfortunes in the near future.

Marrying a relative.

te ah dm

MO) G0 ed os Oh



--- Page 54 ---
| The importance of taboos

Taboos are important in religion because they prevent people from engaging in or
practising bad morals. They also prevent people from getting injured. Taboos also
enforce respect for old people by the young. They protect and preserve culture
and are also observed in religion.

Activity 6

1. Actsome taboos in your culture.
2. Find out more on taboos and report back.

Exercise 4

Answer all the questions.
What is a taboo?
Why are there taboos in the Indigenous religion?
What is ‘chisi'?

Why should people not work on ‘chisi'?

List any 3 taboos in the Indigenous religion.

MRwy >

Word search eee
in e words liste

below from the puzzle tT [i Jo IN |
JESUS HEALER Fo {tu [po lv |
FAMILY TRADITION fT Jule fe.
ANCESTOR SIN Fa [it fe [R |
CULTURE LORD

REIIGION PR [i [t fy |
GOD
$0. cape [NI
SPIRIT
SPIRIT

Project 3

Google different types of musical instruments in Indigenous religion and make
your own. Create your own songs. Play your instruments, sing songs and perform
different dances.



--- Page 55 ---
i ed

HSo=N0us religion has no written documents, it is

rough the internet.
— mas one Supreme Being and is called by different names in different
mmQuoges.

Seecs ond dances reflect cultures of different communities.

© Hagenous religion, music and dance are important tools in the culture.
Ter= are foods that are specially prepared for ceremonies and festivals.
Taboos are important and help people to belong to a religion.

Passed on by word of mouth

A

— a forefather
the formal tradition or action to celebrate a religious event
customary beliefs of a given peopte in.a given period
— something existing in a particular couniry

one who tells the living some messages from the ancestors

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

is the founder of Indigenous religion.

A. The chief B. Noone C. The ancestor D. The spirit medium
— The believers of the Indigenous religion pray to the Supreme Being through

A. ancestors B. traditional healers
C. spirit mediums D. prophets
ndigenous religion is passed from generation to generation through

A. documents  B. prophets C. ancestors D. word of mouth
. Songs and dances reflect different

tu

He

A. cultures B. groups C. interest D. schools
= is one of the traditional dances.
A. Nhemamusasa B.  Isitshikitsha

©. Drum D. Mukwerera

—

e is one of the practitioners of Indigenous religion.
A medical doctor B. teacher

©. Christian D. traditional healer

& sweet potatoes



--- Page 56 ---
8. Name one indigenous fruit. ‘
A. madora B. baobab Cc. oranges D. guava .
9. is one of the traditional songs.
A. Bhuka tiende B. Muchongoyo
C. Raitle D. Hosanna
10. Which of the following is a taboo. .
* A. walking in reverse B. listening
Cc. music D. dancing

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

1. is one of the Indigenous religious practitioners.

2. Does Indigenous religion have documents or books for people to follow?

3. How is the knowledge on Indigenous religion passed from generation to
generation?

4. Name one reason why people sing and dance.

5. State one importance of taboos.



--- Page 57 ---
explain Jesus Christ's baptism and temptation
identify teachings in Christianity

list artists who sing Christian songs

identify songs and dances in Christianity
identify attire worn in Christianity

identify religious artefacts

state the significance of religious artefacts.

“41 fh LA bad LF hI) =

ackground

=rstianity was founded on the life, teachings, death and resurrection of Jesus
rst. Those who follow him are called Christians. The holy book of Christians is the
=. Christians gather at churches for worship, fellowship and study, and engage
the world through sharing the word of God. i

nit7 Christianity
in this unit you will:
outline Jesus Christ's birth and early life
m

Key words
artefact - salvation



--- Page 58 ---
——— = - —

i) Jesus Christ's birth and early life

Angel Gabriel visited Mary and told her that she was going fo give birth to a son.
He was born in Bethlehem. Wise men from the east followed a bright star and if
led them to Bethlehem where Jesus was born. They found him in a manger and
presented their gifts to him. Shepherds also came fo see the new baby.

He grew amongst the Jews and followed the Jewish customs and lifestyle. When
he was twelve, he went for the Passover feast with his parents in Jerusalem and
remained there. His parents searched for him and found him in the temple listening
and asking questions.

ii) Baptism and temptation
Jesus at the age of thirty came from Jerusalem to be baptised by John the Baptist
in the river Jordan. Soon after being baptised, the spirit of God came down upo
Jesus in the form of a dove then the heavens opened and a voice was heard fron
the heavens saying. "This is my son, whom | love; with whom |am well pleased."

Then Jesus was led by the spirit into the wilderness. He did not eat for forty da
and forty nights. The devil asked Jesus to turn stones into bread if he was the sor
of God. Secondly, he took Jesus to the holy city and had him stand on the highes
point of the temple and asked him to throw himself down. Thirdly, the devil toa
Jesus to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the wong
and asked him to bow down to him so as to get all the kingdoms of the wong
However, Jesus refused and overcame all the temptations. Jesus's temptations
also important to Christians to show that anyone can overcome temptation.

Activity 1

Download or cut out from different media different pictures on the birth oF
Jesus Christ.



--- Page 59 ---
Emastians believe that if you believe in Jesus Christ as your Lord and Saviour you
B= to be baptised in water.

=xercise 1

swer all the questions.
Tne believers in Christ are called
Their holy book is the .
The angel that told Mary that she was going to give birth to ason was
Jesus was born ina .
Jesus spent days and nights in the wilderness.
When Jesus was baptised a voice was heard and the came down
upon him in the form of a ,
List three of the temptations that the devil posed to Jesus in the wilderness.
At what age did the Jesus go to the Passover feast in Jerusalem?

Key teachings

Salvation

m Christianity salvation is believed to be being saved or delivered from sin. In the
pook of Genesis the first people created by God were Adam and Eve. They were
yven a commandment by God not to eat the fruit of the tree of knowing good
pnd evil. God said if they ate it they would die. However, the snake said God was
mng to Adam and Eve. If they ate the fruit from the tree, they would become

& God. Adam and Eve listened to the snake and disobeyed God and they ate
me fruit. God punished them by chasing them from the Garden of Eden. People
sorted to grow old and die. They could not live forever anymore.

Besus Christ came to rescue people from death, When he died on the cross, all the
ss done by people in the world were forgiven. Those who believe in Jesus Christ
Sal! not die but live forever with Jesus in heaven. John 3 verse 16 says, “For God
gs loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosever believes in
®in should not perish but have an everlasting life.”

nen Jesus Christ went to heaven he promised to leave Christians with another
Iper, the Holy Spirit.

Roles of the Holy Spirit
ristians believe in God the father, they also believe in Jesus the son of God. They
Believe when Jesus Christ went to heaven Ged sent them the Holy Spirit. The Holy
spirit was sent to teach, guide, lead and comfort Christians during their lives on
earth.

Activity 2
Discuss baptism in Christianity. How do different denominations baptise
RDelievers?



--- Page 60 ---
Exercise 2

Answer all the questions.

The first people created were and
Adam and Eve lived in the garden called ___
The said to Adam and Eve they will noi die.

Jesus Christ died on the .

When Jesus died the of the world were forgiven.
People that believe in Jesus will live
Who sent the Holy Spirit?

Name three things that the Holy Spirit does.

ON AAPRWN>

7C. Songs and dances

Songs and dances are important in Christianity. They help to spread the word of
God. People can earn a living from music and dance. It can also be a source:
of entertainment. People like the Charambas, Mechanic Manyeruke, Fungisai
Zvakavapano Mashavave and others are some of the gospel musicians i
Zimbabwe.

Activit 3

1. Collect, paste and label names of Christian musicians that you know.
2. Lip sync some Christian songs and dance.

7D. Aftire



--- Page 61 ---
an attire

eni Christian groupings wear different attires as a form of identity. The attire
]@s people together and makes it easier fo identify people with their religion. It
mengs people close to God and reminds them of Christian life.

Religious artefacts

® Artefacts

4 artefact is an object that is made by a person, such as a tool or a decoration,
=scecially one that is of historical or cultural interest. In Christianity there are a
suember of artefacts. Religious traditions have items of special significance. These
*ems are usually holy, special and sacred to many people, therefore should be
vected with respect. The Christian artefacts are the Bible, the plain cross, the
Swcifix and the palm cross among several others.

Significance of artefacts

se Bible

™e Christian holy book has two parts: the Old and the New Testament. The Old
Testament has thirty-nine (39) books whilst the New Testament has twenty-seven
27). The New Testament contains the four (4) gospels that tell of Jesus’ ministry,
nistory of the early church and letters of the early leaders to the churches. Originally
written in Greek and Hebrew, the Bible has been translated into many languages.
Christians believe God speaks to them through the Bible because it is the inspired
word of God.

Plain cross
The empty cross is a reminder of the cross on which Jesus was crucified on, his
sacrifice through the resurrection, is the Christian hope of eternal life.



--- Page 62 ---
Crucifix
The cross with Jesus’ body on ii is aremin

believe Jesus went through for them.

der of agony and sacrifice that Christians

Summary
e Christians are people who believe that Jesus Christ died for their sins and he
rose again.

» Christians believe in salvation and the Holy Spirit.
* Songs and dance are important aspects in the religion as they bring joy. unity,

break cultural barriers and differentiate church groupings.
* Different attires also help to identify different church groupings.

Baptism — a ceremony in which someone, is covered or touches

with water in ordet ta welcome them into the Christiar
religion.
Holy Spirit - inthe Christian religion. God in the form of a spirit.
Resurrection — the oecasion on which Jesus Christ was brought back to:

after his death. according fo the Christian religion.

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions
the birth of Jesus Christ.

1. Name the holiday when Christians celebrate

A. Easter _ Christmas Cc. Passover D. Palm

2. Whenhewas twelve, he went for the Passover feast with his in Jerusale
and remained there.
A. friends B. relatives
C. parents D. John

3. Jesus was bom in the town of ;

B. Canaan C. Nazareth D. Bethlenem

A. Jerusalem
4. from the east came to see the new paby Jesus.

A. Three wise Men B. Three foolish men
C. Three anc als D. Three wise women

5. Who baptised Jesus?
A. Jordan B. Jonah

6. Jesus stayed in the wilderness for ;
A. forty week and forty months B. forty days and forty hours

C. forty days 2nd forty nights D. forty weeks and forty nights

Cc. Joseph D. John the Baptist



--- Page 63 ---
| A place where Christians worship is called

pang A. synagogue B. temple Cc. church D. mosque
&. The Christian holy book is called a .
A. Bible B. Torah Cc. Koran D. Scroll
3%. Soon after Jesus was baptised the spirit came down in the form of a
th A. eagle B. dove C. spirit D. water

™2. Songs and dances are important in Christianity because they help
to .
A. spread the word of God B. spread songs
Cc. make people sing D. make joy

Structured questions

tmswer all questions below.

). Draw and label any three artefacts in Christianity.

“hat lead the three wise men to where Jesus was born?
3. Joseph and Mary were Jesus’

Where was Jesus born?

& which two groups of people visited Jesus after his birth?



--- Page 64 ---
Unit8 Judaism

In this unit you will:

state the origin of Judaism
identify the teachings in Judaism
list artists in Judaism

identify songs and dances in Judaism
name the Jewish religious artefacts
describe the Jewish religious attire.

naron>

Background information
in this Unit you are going to learn about the origins.

key teachings of Judaism, their
songs and dance and their attire. You are going to find out more about Judaism
using the internet and by inviting resource persons.

Key words

prophet Mezuzah Sabbath _ Menorah
Torah monotheism Yad

8A. Origin of Judaism
Judaism is a religious tradition with origins that started nearly four thousand years
ago. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are known as ihe ancestors of Judaism. The
founded the religion. Their holy book is the Tanakh or the Torah. Their place o
worship is a synagogue and they pray on a Sa
mainly on Yahweh. Judaism means
(which is now israel and Palestinian territories). Torah is the name given
books of the Bible, that is, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy
The religion is founded on the religious, ethical and social laws as written in th

Torah. They emphasise practice over belief.

8B. Key teachings

i) Monotheism
Monotheism has been defined as the belief in the existenc

created the world, is all-powerful and interferes in the world.

e of only one God th

ere is only one God that exists. Also, they believe that Gos

They believe that th
le do. They also believe th

continues to work in the world, affecting all that peop



--- Page 65 ---
Neir
ism

vat

od
at

God uses prophets to deliver messages to them. They sirictly keep God's laws. The
name of their God is Yahweh. They believe that everything they do is a form of
worship. They worship in a synagogue.

fi) Prophets

A prophet is one who has the ability to predict the future. In Judaism prophets
nave the ability to see the future. The prophets are chosen by God and speak on
behalf of God to God's people to convey a message or a teaching. According
+o the Jews, prophets were close to God and role models of holiness. They also set
tne standards for the whole community.

Exercise 1

Answer all the questions.

How many Gods do the Jews have?

What is the role of prophets in Jewish communities?
Jews call their God .

What is the name of the Jewish holy book?

Who founded Judaism?

What do Jews consider as a form of worship?
What is the Jewish place of worship?

Jews strictly keep God's laws. True or False

CON AOR WNH >

8C. Songs and dances

Songs and dance are a pari of Jewish worship. Psalms are hymns sung at the
synagogue and domestic prayer. Jewish music brings joy, happiness and closeness
to God. Jewish people also sing prayers in familiar melodies to pass information from
one generation to the other. Songs help to pass information from one generation
to the other. Songs help to heal people and put them in a state of prayerfulness.

Activity 1

Sing known Jewish worship songs or listen fo recorded Jewish music.

Exercise 2

Answer all the questions.
Jews sing and iN worship.
Songs and dance are a part of Jewish

Jews pray ina .

Songs help to people.

Do Jews believe in prophets?

Name the Jewish Holy book.

Jews believe in many gods. True or False
Jews believe in life after death. True or False

CONAORWNH>



--- Page 66 ---
Examples of artefacts in Judaism are ihe Menorah, Shabbat, Yad. Mezuzah and
the Torah Scroll.

The Torah scroll contains the laws which Jews try to live by. Yad is a pointer offen
made of silver used when reading from the Torah because it is too precious TO be
touched by the hand.

Mezuzah is a small case from wood, metal or pottery used to remember God. It is
nailed to the Upper right of the door post in a slanting position. It sums up belief in
one God. Jews touch it as they Pass then kiss their fingers. It contains Shema. It isa
reminder of God's presence and that the people living in the home follow his law.
Sabbath is their day of worship. Sabbath is a religious day for rest. Menorah is @
seven branched candle lit daily in the temple.

Activity 2

Draw the Jewish artefacts on the computer. }

Exercise 3

Answer all the questions.

1. Anartefact is a .

>. Give three (3) names of Jewish artefacts.

3. What is a Yad used for?

4. Do you have any artefacts in your religion? If so name them.

J
7



--- Page 67 ---
» and

often
io be |
|

d. It is
lief in
Itisa
Slaw.
hisa

=. Attire

Jewish attire

jewish women tend to wear clothing that is not too tight-fitting, too bright, with
seeves that cover elbows and skirts that cover the knees. In some communities
women wear socks, tights or stockings as well.

There are three basic items worn during Jewish prayer; ihe head covering known
os kippah, and the prayer shawl also known as the fallif used when reading the
Torah. Tne phylacteries also known as tefillin are worn during morning services.

“aried women cover their hair as a sign that they are married. Traditional Jews
=ain girls to dress modestly at a very young age. In some communities men are
sot allowed to wear shorts. The Jews are allowed to put on clothes that suit any
~ommunity they live in as long as they meet the requirements of modesty. Traditional
jewish women wear long skirts because trousers are forbidden for women.

Clothing reflects religious identification, social status, emotional state and even
“he Jewish relationship with the outside world. The Jews believe that maintaining
heir distinctive dress was one of the reasons why they were rescued from the
@2very Under Pharaoh.

Cemoare the Jewish attire to that of your own religion.



--- Page 68 ---
You can cut out pictures of the major religions leat, their places of worship, the
artefacts, the pictures depicting the attire, as well as the postures of worshippers
and music or musical instruments used in each religion. Compile folders which

shall be put on display in the classroom.

Summary

* The Jews believe that there is only one God Yahweh.

* Their place of worship is called the synagogve and they read the Toran.
* Some of their religious artefacts are the Menorah, Shabbat, Yad, Mezuzah,

and the Torah scroll.

» The Jews also use songs and dances as a way of praying.

Glossary

Scroll with ancient writing on it.

— along roll of paper

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

1. The Jewish place of worship Is called a

A. church B. Mosque Cc. Synagogue D. Temple
9. Jews read the .
A. Bible B. Toran Cc. Koran D. Magazine
3. Those in the Jewish religion who are chosen by God and speak for God are

called .
A.Teachers B-. Prophets Cc Pastors D. Friends

4. The Jewish name for God is
A. Mwari B. Jesus Cc. Yahweh D. Allan
5. The Jewish believe that there is God.
A, one . two Cc. three D. four
6. The head covering worn by Jewish women is called
Cc. tefillin veil

A. kippah B. tallit ‘
7. That artefact on which is written a reminder of God's presence and that the

follow his law Is called a

people living in the home
A. Menorah B. Kipph Cc. Mezuzah D. Sabath
8. The scroll contains the laws by which Jews try fo live.

Koran D. letter

A. Bible B. Toran



--- Page 69 ---
~

> The has seven branched candles.

A. Sabbath B. Menorah C. Mezuzah D. Yad
10. A Bible is an artefact for

A. Indigenous religion B. Muslim

C. Jews D. Christians

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
1. Who founded Judaism?
> List 3 Jewish artefacts.

c
. What name do they give to their God?



--- Page 70 ---
Unit9 Islam

In this unit you will:

1. state the origin of Islam

2. identify key teachings in Islam

3. describe the Islamic religious attire

4. list artists in Iskam

5. identify songs and dances in Islam |
6. name Islamic religious artefacts

7. name sacred places in Islam.

Background

You are aware of the Islamic founder, their place of worship and their Holy book
Now you are going to learn more of Islamic religion.

Key words
Ka'bah throb

9A. Origin of Islam
According to history, the prophet Mohammed was born around fhe year 570
When he was about forty years old, he began receiving what the Muslims consid&
to be divine revelations delivered through the angel Gabriel which would late
form the Koran. It proclaimed the monotheistic faith and warned believers of the
coming judgement day. Then Mohammed started laying the foundations of thé
Islamic religion.
Later Mohammed the prophet is believed to have been the founder of Islam. Ths
Muslim holy book is the Koran and their God is Allah. They worship on Fridays ing
Mosque. The people who follow this religion are called Muslims.

Exercise 1

Answer all the questions.
1. was the founder of Islam.
9. |slam’s holy book is the
Where do Muslims go to worship?

What is the name of the Islam God?



--- Page 71 ---
What is their day of worship?

The followers of Allah are called

Muslims believe in God.
Mohammed was a prophet. True or False

arn

> “1 Or

9B. Key teachings

}) Allah

_ Allah is the name given to the supreme and unique God, who created and rules
everything. They believe that Allah knows everything that can be known and that
which has always existed will always exist. The Muslims believe Allah is neither male
nor female, has no shape, cannot be seen or heard but can do anything if asked
"Oo do so.

Believers can approach Allah through praying and by reciting the Koran. Allah is
=o merciful, can give rewards and can also punish fairly. Muslims worship only Allah
because he is worthy of worship. All believe there is only one Gad, Allah. God has
no children, no parents and no partners and was not created by a being. There
are no equal, superior or lesser Gods.

i) Prophet

Muslims believe in human prophets who were chosen by God to communicate
messages. The prophets are a link between the people on earth and the heavens.
This is believed to be the only way to receive divine intervention that is heaven
nterference. God communicates through prophets who receive the message
"nrough angels.

To have faith in the prophets is to believe that God chose morally upright men
to take his message to people. God sent a prophet to all nations so that they
worship God alone and avoid false gods. Some of the prophets were Adam,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Ishmael, Solomon, Moses, Jesus and Mohammed. The
Muslims believe that there is no other prophet after Mohammed and there will be
no other prophet or messenger after him.

They believe that Allah uses prophets to communicate with them. Moslems believe
mat angels are part of God's creation. They believe in the scriptures from the
coran. They also believe that there shall be the final judgment after death. They
believe that there is only one God. Moslems worship in a Mosque on Fridays.

Exercise 2

answer all the questions.
a} Muslims believe in God.
0) What does Allah use to communicate with his people?
Prophets receive messages from



--- Page 72 ---
What is the name of their holy book?
What is the name given fo Muslims’ God?
How many gods do Muslims believe in?

What is their day of worship?

AOR

9 C. Islamic Attire

Muslim men and women wear their religious attire just like in any ofher religion,
The only difference is that they wear the clothing throughout their life-time. The
women wear robe veils covering their face showing only their eyes. The veil ©
believed to be covering them from the European influence. It is called hijab. The
throb is a long robe worn by men with a tailored top. They come in different colour
depending with the season.

1

Activity 1

i
|
|

Collect, paste and label pictures of different religious attire.



--- Page 73 ---
Answer all the questions.

Muslims believe in one

Women are protected from

The clothing for the men is called

Who wears attire in Muslim?

What do women wear on their head and face?
Does the attire change according to seasons?
When do they wear their attire?

Muslim clothes should cover which part of the body?

i) fA

i Os CM os

According to the ancient scholars, songs are allowed in the Islam religion. There
are two kinds of music; the halal and haram. They are played at different times.
Music brings joy and entertains the congregation.

Research on Islam music artists.
nm

Singing and dancing to Islam songs.



--- Page 74 ---
Answer all the questions.
1. List down reasons for the importance of music in Islam.

Define a musician.

2.
3. What are the two uses of songs in religion?
4. Some musicians earn a living through singing. True or False.
5. Name the two types of music in Islam.
a) ‘
b)

Name your favourite musician.

9E. Religious artefacts

Different people believe in different religions. Different religions have different
religious artefacts. The Muslims use the prayer maf, greeting cards, Ka’bah as
some of their artefacts. At prayer they remove their shoes.

Prayer mats are used during Islamic prayers whereby worshippers bow and kneel
on the ground in humility. They kneel on the mats to avoid getting unclean as they
believe cleanliness is next to godliness.

Ka'bah is a building found in Saudi Arabia at the center of Islam's most sacred

place found in Mecca.

po %
}

oH W

»
et PPM

th

)

LL
:

(”

rv
a
(0

|
i

te un b& tal ! }


--- Page 75 ---
At the end of Ramadan, a month where Muslims fast during daylight hours, Muslims
celebrate and give thanks to Allah for giving them strength to successfully keep
the fast of Ramadan. They celebrate the festival of fast-breaking called Eid al-Fitr.
They celebrate by exchanging greeting cards and presents.

Activity 3

1. Listing religious artefacts in Islam.
2. Drawing simple religious artefacts in Islam.

Answer all the questions.
Why do Muslims use prayer mats?
Where is Ka'bah found?
Define Ramadan.
The festival of fast-breaking is called
How do Muslims celebrate Ramadan?
List the artefacts used in Islam.
a)
b)
Cc)

9F. Sacred places

> 5ah in Mecca is found in Saudi Arabia, where able Muslims are expected
> =mbark on the Hajj pilgrimage once in their lifetime. A pilgrimage is a long



--- Page 76 ---
journey made to some sacred place as an act of religious devotion. Mecca
Mohammed's birth place and it is the Islamic holiest city.

The prophet's Mosque was builf by Mohammed. Muslims visit the place durin
the hajj journey. It is believed that one prayer at this Mosque is equivalent to on
thousand prayers.

Al-Aqsa Mosque is in Jerusalem. It was the direction that Muslims prayed towar¢
before it was changed to the Kaaba. Itis at this Mosque that Mohammed ascende
to the sky for his Al-Miraj journey. At the center of the Mosque is the doom of th
rock believed to be the spot where Mohammed ascended to Heaven.

1. Listing Islam's sacred places. |
2. Describing sacred places.

Answer all the questions.

Ka’bah is found in .
built the prophet’s Mosque.

A Muslim should visit Mecca in a lifetime.

A pilgrimage is a

Al-Aqsa is in ,

What is found at the centre of the Mosque?

Where was Mohammed born?

Did Mohammed ascend to heaven? Yes or No

ONAORWN >

Summary

Muslims also use songs and dance in their religion although with a limitation.
Religions have artefacts and sacred places.

Mohammed is the founder of Islam.

Allah is the supreme God for Muslims and is believed to know everything.
Muslims worship in a Mosque on Fridays.

Muslims use songs and dances in their religion.

They have religious artefacts that include the prayer mat, greeting cards any
the ka'bah.



--- Page 77 ---
i — the power to make decisions and make people do things.
gation =— a group of people who go to a religious service.
= - great love, admiration or loyalty.
Kormage — Qy)ourney inot ateligious person makes toa noly place.
Veil - athin piece of cloth worn over a woman's head or face.
Sacred place —- holy place

= orion

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

According to the history of Islam, Mohammed was born in

A. 470 B. 570 Cc. 670 D. 870
2. The founder of Islam is .

A. Isaac B. Abraham Cc. Mohammed D. Jesus Christ
3. Muslims worship in a .

A. Temple B. Mosque Cc. Church D. Synagogue
4. The Supreme Being in Islam is called .

A. God B. Mohammed C. Allah D. Mwari
3. Muslim men and women wear their religious attire

A. on Fridays only B. on Saturday only

C. throughout their lifetime D. on Sundays only
6. The long robe with a tailored top worn by Muslim men is called a

A. throb B. robe Cc. gown D. veil
7. The kind of Muslim music that can be played anywhere is the

A. halal B. haram Cc. soul D. tradition
8. Muslims remove their at prayer time.

A. veil B. throb C. shoes D. tailored top
2. Asacred place found in Mecca is the

A. Shrine B. Ka'bah C. Mosque D. Al-Mirgj
19. The Islamic holy city is

A. Mecca B. Saudi Arabia C. Medina D. Ka'bah

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

’. Who founded Islam?

<. What is the name of clothing worn by men?
Women leave their faces uncovered. True or False
+. Women wear a veil. True or False

>. What is the Moslem place of worship?



--- Page 78 ---
End of term two assessment

Multiple choice questions
Paper 1 (ihr 30 minut

Answer all the questions. (50 marks)

1. Which of these is dangerous in a family?
A. love B. respect Cc. hatred D. gratitude
2. children are deprived of parental care.

A. Home seekers B. Homeless C. Home owners D. Home sick
3. At which of these places could a street child be found sleeping?

A. Inthehotel B. Inthelodge C. Underabridge D. Ina super
4. Health workers help people in their _ .

A. religion B. community C. faith D. belief
5. Community-based care involves working with people who are

A. rich B. irresponsible

C. not infected with HIV/AIDS D. infected and affected by HIV/
6, Old people’s homes accommodate

A. the sick B. the aged Cc. the orphaned D. the aband
7. One charitable act that you can do for old people’s homes is

A. donating clothing and food 8B. donating fertiliser and seed

C. donating stationery D. donating bicycles
8. Wecare for the hospitalised through .

A. talking about them B. feeling pity for them

Cc. visiting them D. abandoning them
9. Acharitable act for street kids is to .

A. arrest them B. beat them

Cc. sympathise with them D. help in cash or kind
10. A street kid has nowhere to live and is a

A. rich person B. grateful person

Cc. generous person D. homeless person

11. Neighbours must in the society.
A. hurt each other B. love each other
Cc. insult each other D. fight each other
12. Joseph worked as a

A. shepherd B. carpenter C. lawyer D. shoemaker
13. All religions believe in hard and not cheating.

A. praying B. work C. fasting D. sleep
14. dishonours God.

A. Singing B. Preaching CC. Working D. Gambling
15. In Indigenous religion many people put their trust in .

A. chiefs B. elders Cc. Jesus D. ancestors



--- Page 79 ---
>. Muslims sacred place is called

A. Hadith B. Ka'bah C. Masjid
'7. Muslims fast in which month?

A. Hajj B. Ramadan C. Shalada
|8. Which of the following is not a mea

A. Sticking to one faithful partner
€. Having multiple sexual partners
19. During which festive celebrations do
Christ?
A. Ramadan _B. Zakat C. Christmas
. The Jewish day of rest is observed at the .
A. mosque B. church C. madzimbabwe
- Where did Mohammed go to seek peace and quiet?

B. Abstinence
D. Honesty

A. mosque B. cave C. temple
. Who tempts us?
A. the devil B. god C. friends
. Mukwerera is a making ceremony.
A. rain B. drought C. food
. What is Ramadan known for?
A. fasting B. feast of lights

C. reading the Koran D. praying
. Indigenous religion involves the worship of

A. chiefs B. ancestors  C. idols
- Thé man who had a passion for the disabled and taugh

. Jesus’ home town was .
A. Canaan B. Bethlehem

. The founder of Islam is .
A. Mohammed B. Jesus Cc. Abraham
. How Can you help the poor in your community?
A. Give them what they need.
C. Teach them to help themselves. Dz
. On Good Friday Christians remember the
A. birth of Jesus Christ

C. resurrection of Jesus Christ
. In which book of the Bible do we read abo
to Canaan?

A. Judges B. Deuteronomy
C. Exodus D. Leviticus

. The first books of the New Testament are called

A. Episties B. Gospels C. Law Books

C. Nazareth

Ignore them.

D. Psalms

D. Waduu

D. Sunna

sure for HIV/AIDS prevention?

people remember the birth of Jesu

D. Easter
D. synagogue
D. church
D. parents

D. ngozi

D. prophets
t them different skills

was ;
A. Matthew Rusike B. David Livingstone
C. Jairos Jiri D. Bernard Mizeki

D. Jerusalem

D. Vishnu

B. Seek donors for them.

B. death of Jesus Christ
D. baptism of Jesus Christ.
ut migration of Israelites from Egyp



--- Page 80 ---
. The Jewish place of worship is the .

A. church B. mosque C. synagogue D. temple

. All religions agree that faith is shown by ;

A. going to church B. pride and knowledge

C. giving D. prayer and belief

. One way of communicating with God is ‘

A. listening to his word B. praying

C. when we give offerings D. going to church

. How many times a day do Moslems pray?

A. two B. five C. four D. three

. Name the day Jewish people worship God.

A. Friday B. Saturday C. Sunday D. Monday

. What do we call the holy city of the Moslems?

A. Mecca B. Mosque C. Church D. Temple

. What were the last words Jesus said before he died?

A. “It is finished"

B. ‘Father forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing."
C. ‘Father! give my spirit into thy hands.”

D. “I promise you that today you will be in paradise with me."

. When does God answer our prayers?

A. Before we sleep. B. When we give offerings at church.
C. Anytime. D. When we cry.

. The holy prophet of Moslems is .

A. Jesus B. Allah C. Mohammed D. Elish

. What do we call the Jewish festival of lights?

A. Diwali B. Pentecost C. Easter D. Christmas
. The first people to be created were .

A. Eve and John B. Adam and Eve

C. Adam and Eva D. Eva and John

. Jesus overcame temptation by

A. asking God to help him

B. answering the temptations rudely

C. fasting

D. using the scriptures to challenge tne devil

. Gratitude is .

A. being thankful B. being famous

C. being watchful D. being happy all the time

. A Mosque is for the Moslems, whereas a church is for the

A. Christians B. Jews

C. Indigenous believers D. Moslems

. Complete the following statement. There is much more happiness in givi
than in .

A. asking B. receiving C. begging D. borrowing



--- Page 81 ---
48. The Bible is divided into parts, namely

A. Genesis and Numbers B. Matthew and Luke
C. Koran and Torah D. Old and New Testament
49. What do Christians remember on Christmas day?
A. The death of Jesus Christ B. The second coming of Jesus
C. The birth of Jesus Christ D. The baptism of Jesus

50. A good friend is someone who
A. you share food with at break 8B. doesn’ t agree with you
C. tells you when you are wrong D. offers you presents

Structured questions

Paper 2 (1hr 30 minutes)

Section A (30 marks)
Answer all questions in this section.

1. a) Name one role of the ancesiral spirits. [1]
b) Inwhich part of the country is Mhande dance practiced? [1]
c) Name two taboos in the Indigenous religion. [2]
d) What name is given to the Supreme Being by followers of Indigenous
religion? [1]
Jesus was baptised by [1]
b) Atwhat age was Jesus baptised? [1]
c) Howmany temptations did Jesus have? [1]
d) Howlong did Jesus stay in the wilderness? [1]
e) Whatis the Christian's place of worship called? [1]
3. a) Whatis the holy book for the Christians? [1]
b) How many books are in the Christians’ holy book? [1]
c) Christians have many Gods. True or False. [1]
d) Christians believe in life after death? True or False [1]
e) What happened after Jesus’ baptism? [1]
4. Why is music and dance important in church? [1]
. List two ways of talking to God.
g) (1]
b) [1]
5. a) The Bible is divided into parts. [1]
b) The parts are and [2]
. a) The Jews use songs and dances as a way of worship.
True or False [1]
b) Whatnameis given to the Jews' head cover they wear? [1]
c) What is used when reading the Torah? [1]
d) What contains the law which Jews follow? [1]
What is an artefact?

id
Q

1S a)



--- Page 82 ---
4
4

8. a) Onwhich day do Muslims go to worship?
b) How many Gods do Muslims believe in?
c) An object of religious interest that is man-made is called
d) Give two artefacts found in the Islamic religion
i.
ii.

There are six questions in this section. Answer any four.
1. a) What is an artist?
b) Give names of two musical artists you know.
i.
ii.
c) When do Muslims remove their shoes?
d) Whatis used by Allah to communicate with his people?
2. a) Do they believe in prophets?
b) Are angels part of God's creation?
c) What do Moslems believe in?
d) When co they wear their attire?
e) What is the Moslems’ holy book called?
3. a) What gives the Koran's source of authority?
b) Describe the Islamic attire.
c) What is the Mosque?
4, a) Jews believe in prophets. True or false
b) Jews believe in life after death. True or False
c) Name one Jewish musical artist.
d) What is the role of songs and dances?
e) What is the meaning of Judaism?
5. List three Jewish ancestors.

c

d) What is the Mezuzah?
e) Where is the Minorah lit up?

6. a) God gave Jesus the as a sign of love on the day he was
baptised.

b) An orphan is

c) Polygamy is .

d) Muslims call God .

[2

Section B (20 marks)



--- Page 83 ---
Topic Morals and values

3

Introduction

3y merely looking, all people are the same physically. It is their characteristics,
morals and values which differ. The morals and values of an individual depend
on one's upbringing and belief. If is the duty of the family and community to
mpart good morals and values to the children. This topic deals with rightness and
wrongness of an individual. The topic also deals with conflicts in the family and

neir management. Use of technology in religion is discussed and its impact on
values.



--- Page 84 ---
Unit 10 Concept of morals and values

In this unit you will:

distinguish right from wrong

identify the qualities of an upright person

name different religions

explain the right to belong to a religion

describe responsibilities of belonging to a religion
state benefits of belonging to a religion

state respectful manners acceptable in society
state children's rights and responsibilities

identify ways of treating others fairly.

OONAUORWH >

Background

You have learnt about the attributes of good morals and discussed religiog
rights, responsibilities and the benefits of good behaviour. Conflicts and contig
managemeni are a way of life. Children have some morals and values from ¢
early age from their homes, churches and schools.

Key words
yo attribute right

10A. Right and wrong

Morals



--- Page 85 ---
hart do you consider to be something right in a person? This question was asked
'0 grade 4 learners at a certain school in Plumtree. Plumtree is a drought stricken
area. Some learners said that the person who donates food to their homes is a right
person, some thought a right person is the one who offered work to their parents.
if we look at the responses of these children we can see that they only looked at
their needs. Let's read a short story below about a girl who lived in Plumtree.

Limbikani is a child who came from a very humble family. The family was rich and
very religious. Limbikani was well known in the community. She always showed
respect to other people. She never passed a person without greeting him or her
or giving help. Every Saturday, she would go to church. She was a youth leader at
her church. She was also a head girl at her schoo! because of her behaviour and
character. She was never found in the wrong place at the wrong time. Everyone in
the community liked her. She had good moral values expected by her community.
She was very trustworthy and unselfish.

Right refers to something that is good and acceptable. The right things people

ligious should do are to love one another, respect each other, and avoid fighting,
onflict stealing, killing, shouting at each other and lying. Wrong means something that is
ym an not correct or true.

Some of the wrong things are stealing, cheating, mischief, not attending school
and not respecting others. Bullying, fighting, disobedience and dishonesty, cruelty,
selfishness and greediness, slapping others and making unnecessary noise are also
wrong things.

Exercise 1

Answer all the questions.
The girl mentioned in the story is .
A. Kupakwashe B. Kudakwashe C. Limbikani D. Qhubekani
The story took place in .
A. Rwanda B. Plumitree C. Gweru D. Beitbridge
Limbikani comes from a very family.
A. humbie B. hungry C. boastful D. selfish
Limbikani's family was .
A. poor B. richness C. rich D. cruel
Besides being a leader in the church, she was also

A. selfish B. a head boy C. ahead girl D. a bully
What is a drought stricken area?

Why did some children think that those who donated food had rightness?
What kind of a person can you say has the qualities of an upright person?



--- Page 86 ---
10B. Attributes

An attribute is a quality looked at as a character. The most common religion
Africa are Indigenous, Islam, Judaism and Christianity. All the religions believ:
bringing up a good person.

Uprightness is something we admire and wish to have. As we are individuals ¢
different, we may understand qualities of an upright person in different ways. Th
are some qualities known by almost everyone to be good. An upright perso
seen from the time he or she is young. Some atiributes may start to show in a per
when they grow older. People may develop good or bad attributes as they gi
because of peer influence from friends, relatives and neighbours. Some attrib.
may also develop from within a person. He or she may decide to behave inay
he or she wants.

An upright person greets people in good manner, he listens to other people's vie
and does not associate with people of bad or loose morals. He is able to ider
a good and a bad friend. He tells the truth all the time. If his friend does sometr
wrong, he tells him and gives good advice. He does not shout at people or
involved in quarrels and fights. He respects and takes good advice from eld
people. He does not smoke, take alcohol or drugs. Some people even add
habit of going to worship with others. Worshipping with others guides someone
live a good and upright life.

Fillin the qualities of a good and a bad person in the table below;

Ce 0

People like a person with good morals. A person with good morals does not fir
difficult to get help. They ask for help with respect that people find it easy to a
them. A person with good morals is easily promoted to positions of authority,
example, Class monitor, prefect, group leader or team leader. This is because \
can trust them to treat everyone fairly.



--- Page 87 ---
ons in
sve in

sand
There
son is
erson
grow
iputes
a way

views
lentify
thing
or get
>Iderly
id the
one to

t find if

> assist
ity, for
se YOU

10C. Right to b

Salom is a young girl from Binga. Her background is of Indigenous religion. In her
community, there are children of different religions. Some are Muslims, some are
Jews, some are Christians and of course some belong to Indigenous religion. She
would sometimes go to a church with a Christian friend and sometimes she would
go to a Mosque. After attending different ceremonies of different religions, she
thought of going back to her Indigenous religion where she used to dance to
Jerusalem and dinhe.

When she was a bit older, she made her final decision. She converted to Christianity
and was baptised. She became a very strong member in her church. Now she
is Q nun. A nun is a woman who is a member of a religion who has committed
herself to work in religion. Some people from the village accused her father saying
why did he allow her to repent to Christianity. Her father opened a constitution
document for them. A consitution document contains ali the people's rights. He
showed them a statement which says that every person in Zimbabwe has the right
to belong to a religion of his or her choice. After all, by the time Salom took this
decision she was now a grown up. She was twenty years old.

Exercise 2

Answer all the questions.
. Salom grew up in

. Aconstituion is ;
. At last Salom decided to choose which religion?

What is a nun?

List three religions you know.

. Which religion do you belong to?

. In which part of the country is ‘Jerusalem' a common dance?
. At what age did Salom decide to repent to her new religion?

ONAMRWH—



--- Page 88 ---
10D. Respect for other human beings
it is important to show respect to others.

- Greeting elders.

- Respecting parents and all other people in the community.
- Wearing decent clothes.

— Speaking politely.

— Showing appreciation.

- Apologising when you have done wrong.

Hannah's family has a neighbour. They love each other very much. Their child
always play together and they learn at the same school. Hannah worships
Saturday and her friend Leah worships on a Friday. The dressing of the two fa
is almost the same. At leisure time the fathers of the two families watch 3
television programmes together.

We have learnt about Jews and Muslims. Jews’ holy book is the Torah and
pray to Yahweh. Muslims' holy book is the Koran and they call their God ‘
Af schoo! Hannah's other friends are Fikile, a Christian and Tatenda who pra
Indigenous religion. There is freedom of worship and there are no religious
in Our Country. This is the reason why you find people of different religions livi
harmony together as neighbours. It is good to live peacefully together regan
of different religions.



--- Page 89 ---
nildren
sona
amilies
some

d they
Allah’,
actises
iS WIS
ving in
ordiess

Activity 2

1. Discuss as a class the characteristics of a good neighbour.
2. In groups dramatise children of different religions playing together, each
and everyone talking about his or her religion.

Exercise 3

Make sensible words

Ywaheh

Jadusmi

Pary

Msemol

Jwes

What religion do you think Hannah belonged to?

Why should people of different religions live peacefully together?
Who started Judaism?

In the story practised Indigenous religion.

OONAaARWN >

10E. Rights and responsibilities in fairness

Every person has his or her rights as a person in the family, Community and the
country af large. A right is something that you are morally or legally allowed to do
or have. As children you also have your own rights. Together with your teacher you
will discuss some of the rights you know. You have a right to belong to a family. This
is your very immediate right. Your family is there to take care of you and provide
everything they are able to. If your family is poor do not think they are not taking
care of your rights, accept that families are different, some are poor and some
are rich.

Families are there to provide you with things like food, shelter and clothes. As a
child it is also your right to play with others. As you have rights, you also have some
responsibilities. Doing household chores is a way of preparing you for adulthood.
You should learn to wash your own clothes, help your mother to wash plates and
pots, and learn to cook at an earlier age of life. It is also good to water some
vegetables at one time or another. As you grow you will learn some of your rights
which are not mentioned here.

Activity 3

List three rights and responsibilities of a child.



--- Page 90 ---
Exercise 4

Answer all the questions.
1. All people have their
Parents should take care of their
Children have rights and

Children like to with others.

Families provide children with food, ss and
Why should children know their rights?

Name three household chores you know.

List one right you have.

SONA MO EWND

Find detailed information on human rights as stated in the United Nam
Charter on the internet and they make write-ups of “children's rights”
stated in the Charter.

2. You should create posters where they write the theme reflecting =

“stated right."

Summary

¢ People have beliefs, norms and values.

¢ Rightness should be differentiated from wrongness.

e Everyone has aright to belong to a religion of his or her own choice.
« Respecting other people brings peace among people.

« People have rights and responsibilities.

Glossary

Moral relating to character, being able to separate right 7
wrong.

Rightness correctness, straight. directly.

Wrongness incorrect, not right, immoral.

Attributes characteristics or qualities.

Responsibilities duties or accountability.



--- Page 91 ---
End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

). The way one is brought up can determine his___——_s behaviour.

A. moral B. value C. morality D. belief
2. One's morals can be right or .

A. upright B. clean C. wrong D. rightness
3. What we believe in builds our .

A. rights ° B. wrongs C. friends D. character
4. Respecting others makes people live .

A. peacefully B. jealously C. kindly D. humbly
5. Stealing is ;

A. right B. bad C. good D. allowed
6. Police keep law and order. They also arrest

A. thieves B. men Cc. women D. boys
7. People in the community like an person.

A. upright B. disobidient C. bad D. easy
8. A person should listen to other people's .

A. rights B. characters C. statements D. views
9. One of the household chores is .

A. sweeping the house B. farming

C. playing D. eating
10. In Zimbabwe there is freedom to choose your own ‘

A. speech B. religion C. identity D. family

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

. One of the qualities of a bad person is
One of the qualities of a good person is
We should each other.
What is a shelter? Give two examples.
How many religions do you know?



--- Page 92 ---
Unit 11 Conflict and conflict management

1. identify causes of family conflicts
9. identify effects of family conflict
3. suggest appropriate ways of managing family conflict.

Background
Conflict is disagreement of two or more people. Conflicts exist aGMong people
since people have different opinions and ideas. It is something we cannot run
away from or avoid. We have to find ways of managing it so that it does noe
develop into wars and hatred. There are some conflicts which have good resu!
depending on how they have been handled.

Key Words

managing selfishness

Conflict may arise when people are jealous of each other. gossip, fail |
communicate well, lack trust and when they are greedy. Selfishness is one of tf
causes. Selfishness refers to the behaviour of someone who is concerned with |

or her interests only.



--- Page 93 ---
>ople
ot run
ss Not
esults

fail to
of the
vith his

Selfish Peter

This story is about the Tlou family. Mr and Mrs Tlou passed away leaving four children
behind, two boys and two girls. They leff behind some cattle, goats, a grinding mill,
money in the bank and a house in one of the cities. The elder brother Peter was
very selfish. The rest of the family and even those of the distant family members did
not like him for that.

He would sell some cattle and use the money carelessly with some friends. He
would not even pay fees for his three siblings. He would not even share with his
two sisters. Chipo the elder sister would sometimes quarrel with him because of
that. The money he got from the grinding mill was under his control. When their
parenis died, they settled for a room each since their parents’ house in Seke had
four rooms. They put some tenants also known as lodgers so that each and every
one gets money to help himself or herself.

Peter would collect money from the grinding mill and use it to travel to Harare. He
would collect rentals for the four rooms pretending to be representing the other
three children. He would then spend all the money by himself. The other three
children Chipo, Sam and Ashley including some relatives were not happy about
Peter's behaviour. This caused conflicts in the family.

Activity 1

Dramatise the above story as a class. Choose Peter, Chipo, Sam and Ashley.
Also choose Peter’s friends, tenants and relatives. Those left will be neighbours in
the rural home and in Seke.

Exercise 1

In the story the cause of conflict was selfishness. True/False

The elder brother was Sam. True/False

Besides selfishness, the other cause of conflict is kindness. True/ False
Mr and Mrs Tlou's house was in Seke. Trve/False

What is the other name for tenant?

Name two benefits left behind by Mr and Mrs Tlou.

What does the story teach us?

How many children did the Tlous leave behind?

CNAOA EWN >

11B. Managing Family conflicts

Conflicts in a family need to be managed. Managing is having control or handling
a situation well. Conflict in the family is not a healthy situation. If ever we get involved
in conflicts, we should try by all means to solve the differences. As upright people
we should not encourage conflicts or create situations which favour conflicts.



--- Page 94 ---
There are ways of managing family conflicts. When having conflicts, try to so
them before you engage other people. If you have failed as a family you c
call people like an aunt, uncle or a family friend. If the conflict is about shar
property you can go to an older person in the family or to the court. If the conflic
due to mistrust, one should learn to have trust in other people. Trusting each of
will avoid suspicion. Working hard makes one not to be jealous and be satisf
with what he or she has. Some church elders can also help in managing far

conflicts.

1. Create a scene showing conflict and dramatise it in groups.
2. Draw people fighting and write three sentences about it. (The cause of tl
fight and how it can be resolved).

Answer all the questions.
Conflict in the family is not a situation.

We should not encourage

An can settle a family conflict.

As family members we should each other to avoid suspicions.
Being satisfied with what you have prevents
What is a conflict?

People should trust each other to avoid conflict. Trve/False
Trust makes people have conflicts. True/False

ONAN WN


--- Page 95 ---
Summary

¢ There are conflicts in the families.
* Conflicts are caused by different opinions.
Family conflicts can be managed.

Conflicts - disagreement or clash between two opposite individuals or
groups.
Counsellor — a professional who counsel people on personal problems.

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

Disagreement may lead to

A. kindness B. selfishness C. conflict D. love
2 may result from conflict.
A. good B. joy C. family D. war
5 One of the causes of family conflicts is .
A. food B. property inheritance
Cc. clothes D. ploughing
4 We should use family property with .
A. care B. friends C. other people D. church
=. A person who uses someone's house and pays rentals is called a lodger
or :
A. tenant B. lodgings Cc. rent D. borrower
s Aperson should for himself or herself rather than look forward to
receiving.
A. work B. give Cc. manage D. sleep

7. Which statement is NOT true.
. conflict is caused by jealousy
conflict causes war.
. conflict is healthy.
. lack of trust causes conflict.
= are a form of wealth.
A. Cattle B. Clothes C. Phones D. Groceries
*, Money paid by a lodger is called .
A. fees B. rates C. lodge D. rentals
10. Gossiping is .
A. nice B. bad C. fair D. good

90>



--- Page 96 ---
Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

1. Aperson who usually settles conflicts in a family is an

2. Forms of wealth are cattle, buildings and

3. Everyone has been involved in a conflict at one time or ++ another. True OF
False

4. Some conflicts become so serious that if not properly managed they lead
to death. True or False |

5. List three things that may cause conflict.



--- Page 97 ---
Unit 12 National value systems

In this unit you will:

1. state aspects of responsibility
2. explain responsibility as it relates to various contexts.

Background

It is good to show signs of respect to others. If you want respect from others you
should also do likewise.

Key words

dignity honesty peace political tolerance
fairness respect

Responsibility

National values are important because they make people know what is good and
bad. Something with value is something very important. Values bring responsibilities
to people. When people value peace it means they should be responsible in
maintaining peace. Below are some of the responsibilities that people should
have.

Peace

Peace is when there is no war or when people are not fighting. It is a responsibility
for everyone to maintain peace in their family, community, school and or country.
lt is very important for people to live in peace. When people live in peace, no one
may get hurt. At school we have teachers and prefects that are responsible for
making sure that children do not fight and hurt each other.

Respect

“Respect is appreciating other people's feelings, wishes and rights. Everyone has
= responsibility of having respect for other people. Children should respect the
2cerly and their friends. People should respect others in the community, at school,
church and everywhere. You should respect those who enforce the law too. These
a= people like the police and the church elders.

Solrness

Saimess is when you treat people equally without favour. People have a

sponsibility of being fair. Everyone should treat people fairly. Parents have to

v=ot their children fairly. They should not favour one child because he or she is
-elligent or beautiful than the other. When your parents buy you food or clothes,

*<y should buy for all children. They should share everything among their children


--- Page 98 ---
Dignity

Dignity is the way you handle yourself so that people can respect you. W
someone has dignity people get fo respect that person. Dignity can be shi
by the way one speaks, dresses and socialises with others. It is your responsit
to make sure that you have the quality of dignity. Policemen should have dic
so that people may respect them when they are at work. If a policeman is s
walking drunk and hitting people, he or she can lose respect.

Honesty

Honesty means being truthful. It is everyone's responsibility to be honest. W
people are honest they can be trusted by others. If you are honest to your par
and your teacher, they will love you and trust you. Your parents may always
you nice things when you tell them the truth all the time. It is also safe for you ta
an honest person to do something for you. For example, when your parents s
you to buy bread, and you bring enough change they will trust you.

Political tolerance

Political tolerance means participating in what the country as a whole thin
important. In Zimbabwe people are expected to show respect and be responsi
This is shown by attending national events, for example, Independence ¢
Heroes day, Unity day and all other national events.

1. In groups, list down things that are national values.
2. State the responsiblilties of people to maintain the values you have listec

Answer all the questions.
1. should be responsible.

A. Mothers only B. Everyone ©. Fathers only D. Policemen o;
2. The following is not a responsibility.

A. House B. Honesty Cc. Dignity D. Peace
3. When there is peace there is no .

A. money B. war Cc. family D. community
4. If you are honest people may you.

A. hurt B. reject Cc. trust D. fight
5. Some of the national events are Heroes’ day, Unity day and

A, Independence B. Passover

Cc. Easter D. Sports



--- Page 99 ---
Project 6

in three groups, the first group will visit a religious leader in the community. The
second group will visit the school counsellor. If there is no counsellor they visit the
nearest police public relations officer. All the groups will find information about
attributes of an upright person. They will compile the information on one sheet,
in the class.

Summary

* There are aspects of responsibility such as respecty, honesty, political tolerance,
dignity and fairness.
* Self, family, community and nation are contexts which relate to responsibility.

Glossary

BRS ES | S228 5

iS is Nation — a group of people sharing the same language, culture.
Die. community of people.

jay. Responsibility — being answerable, or having authority to direct and take
necessary action.

End of unit assessment

Multiple choice questions

. National values make people know

A. Good and bad B. Police and nurses
C. Freedom and fight D. Church elders
2. Children should respect the .
A. Parents only B. Elderly only
Cc. Friends only D. All of the above
3. When people are not fighting we say there is .
A. Freedom B. Fairness
c. Peace D. Conflict
4 People respect you if you handle yourself with .
A. Fairness B. Political tolerance
c. Peace D. Dignity
= independence falls under which value?
A. Respect B. Honesty
c. Political tolerance D. Dignity



--- Page 100 ---
_ Treating people equally is an example of which value?
A. Dignity B. Fairness
C. Political tolerance D. Honest
7. Respect is shown by .
A. Appreciating other people's feelings
B. Hitting others
C. Hurting people
D. Trusting everyone
8. Heroes day is a event.

A. Class B. National Cc. School D. Home
9. Which people enforce the law?
A. Vendors B. Drivers Cc. Police D. Elders

10. Which statement is true?
A. Giving one child two sweets and the other child three sweets show
fairness.
B. Shouting at people shows respect.
C. Fighting is a way of showing peace.
D. Handling yourself with respect shows dignity.

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
means appreciating other people's feelings.

have to treat their children fairly.
Name one national event.
List two responsibilities you know.
National values are important. True or false

nMrRwWN>



