--- Page 1 ---
Ventures Primary

New Curticulim

J

Learner's Book



--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primary

English

Learner's Book Grade _



--- Page 3 ---
Sind vith hE ibang
ole ono apr 260% 2AM

Sumy poman, ws inca cy. erp Fr cdnilon 1s Fa

Jmlilic twa mye: Title ti iran

Fist philiion 511

Publiskinl by

Press Publishers fin Lig
3 Cotes! odd

retin em Clg lap :
Athen by We. Mukti, 1 win ancien and £* Seay
Coverite by Comme College ucioé Seticil bk Th Poesy

THN TT900 Ande

Adiwawiedz oars
Themis sick ore: rbd do Tp pe el Nts Archies af dimtisbuig
STARCH FY ee of the Ip. SiiGiis

: i hing el Re TEE ri ders HW they
ee ty prehe ihe he

es ligat tu photocopy airy pase of thls Bosh wittioa wiilies perkiibtion —


--- Page 4 ---
| Contents )

Unit 2 Our horttage sites... SE TIE Bll Co Ty |

Revision and assessment 1.. RUAN - |
Unit 3 Wher ther rain comes: Part... Seti ores EERE tte a es op
Unit's When the rain con 55 HF 3

Revision and OSSessment 2. iossesesioeesesiorssins. 18
UNIS ARIE] SONI siaiseimimsssssios ssminininias issn hnmsasabnpasssss8 sacar emansnbenses sermons | HY
Unit & Revision and assessent SR 23
Unit 7 Taking care of QUBEIVET cove PP eR Ss sana A
Unit B Good] TNGNMEIS oii aie ite essai ie bins sese ee snaraie BT

Revision and J ——— BR ee reer eri]
Unit ¥ Qurngtional heroes and hergines .. SU - ¥ |
init 10 Letters fo friends and relatives Lessee Jsanas eases CGA: 50
Revision and SESE Basis eimisa i hear pei 51 sedan
Unit 11 Animalstories eR ew EE RE pe “54
Unit 12 End cf term 1 asses STrLET J Cid

Term 2

UniE13 A day SF Silly mis tOKES.... cosine ssisinnssase ns sss sis se sain +2 G8
Unit 14 Markit ng Fons and, sing it A SiiiizEesiiut TR

Revision and assessment Fo iii bias in Th
Unit 15 Tourists and the places hay visit: Part 1 ooiieasmimiminiins ve 75
Unit 15 Tourists ohd the places Hey vit: Part 2 .. SUR . «|

Rewvislon ane a AT lA nent Basins Cer SE ia ae 1 Bb
Unit 17 Growing vp in a good ide! BY Se PPR PETG
Unit 18 Revision and assesment 9. ts 74

Unit 20 How! we CARMURICTIE: with Sitier er people EU 1 1
Revision and assessment 10... TTT FE TP YEAR EPRIRE |: |:
Unit 21 Sports and sports legends. FO IEE PIPES TRITON oe § ©
Unit 22 Living together... ee erie, | BS
Revision and assessment 11. Ts 130



--- Page 5 ---
Teim 3

Unit 25. Our Powis TING SHIGE ec iv porimimsrmsiirs

Unit 2&

on on om om

~ 148

Jsirvg winrds comecily A —————————

Revision and assessment 13...... orp esis L157

Unit 27 Le

Revision and 5565
Unit 29 ‘Wriat som

Reon nel assessment 14...

Uri 34 Asking for, and giving directions...
Revision and as

Cl i Ming: Clmes. not end! HLL sty fe gp an mE BB BE REECE

Unit 28 Comparing things... SE SEE Re ER pro | 1.x
rent 14... LL ee 1 A Rapp p—
people ¢ ota ricke lo lac RS —
Ui 0 Revision and ouspssment 15... Cyd i EPST

RE A

FE EEE

Unik 33 TravelTig 10 far POSES or. a —

Unit 35 Children's: ights....... | EE ree Fe

Unit 36 End of terri 3ossessment test Tres"

1460

173
I Bi
+ 182

201

[EL JR NRRL Lad]



--- Page 6 ---
Say the fines of this poem Ger your fracher. Taka furhs to read the
palais it

Welcome: back! oe
We welcome back taichoal: §#
Our frends,

Cur classmates, ond

Our teachers!

[ri This new school year,
We prornise fo be:
Smart,

Honest,

Obedient,
Responsible and
Hardworking!

[B wirite and read

Chote the comect answes. N oo
1. The boys and girls wha leam with me in the same class. gre my

A. teachers B. friends ©. closmates

2. The wird sma! means
A, very sfrong dnd fast
8. fidy and dressed in clean clothes
C. welcome back fo school


--- Page 7 ---
Welcome back fo school

9) Listen and read x

Say the lines af t5is poem diter your teacher. Take tums fo read fhe
‘Welcome back! -—

We welnome back school: § an

Cur friends; Li

Dur clpsstnales; and
Dur tedchers!

In This new school yedr,
We promise to bet
Honest.

Obeaslient,

Responsible and
Hardworking!

[write and reas
Shope ihe conec Snswesr.
The Boys and gids wha lggm with me in the same closs are my

A. teachers B. friends C. classmiotes
2 The word ssieul neans

A: weary strong and fst

B. tidy cirnd dressed Ih clean ¢ipthes

3 welcome back to sched!



--- Page 8 ---
3. What do honest people do?
A. They tell Tes ard cheat other people.
: ;: THEY always tell the thith and never cheat:

C. Thay sometimes fell the fnith.

4 children always do what they dre told 1o do by their parents
and tea: hers,
A. Careful B. Obedient C.. Lazy

5 Youare when you put in a lot of effor infa your work.
A. slow. B. funny C. heirdworking

= Speak

Ask the leaner sifting next 1o you this quesfion:

+ What did you do.during the school holidays?
Answer the question: ke this:

Bung the sehaal holidays |

Using do or did

Look at these two sentences:
Everyday | do some work In the garden,
Yesterday | did same work in the garden,

ba do ot did to complele the sentences below,

Everyday after scheol I my homework.

bast evening | ry iy hom ework before going tebed,
Every weekwe some work if the Garden,

During the fast Holideys, we. a lot af work in the fields.
Evefydoy myparents alot of work at home,

| TRENg

- Speak: Extra mile |

Using go and went conectly

Say these two sentences after yous teacher

= Every week | go tochurch with my fomily:
+ Lost week | went to church with my family.



--- Page 9 ---
1. Tel the class where you go everyday/every week/every hofiday/
ay year? Say it like this:
Tats ay fEvery wiaek Every Holidoy/Every year

2. Tell the-class where you went to yasterday/last week/flast holiday!
Last year. Say it lke this:
«  Yesterdav/Last week/Ldst holidoy/lostyeer)

Witting a paragraph
Jali a Hamgraph. about what You ed SLi he fonds: Sean By

What | did i dstng the holidays.

During the holidays |

(PD Listen and write JE |

Spelling ond dictation
Your teacher will call oul some words from the poem You read in This
ur Listes carey anid write down the words corey,

Ha nidwriting

Copy the lefters and sentence below info your books:
Aa Bb Cc Dd
Arnahle, Batsiral and Dalisani are happy to be back: at school.


--- Page 10 ---
Liste do whet your feccher falls you about heritage sites:
Heritage sites are places kia are ary mort parts of our history and
culture, These ra some-of our herfoge sites in Zimbabwe:

« the Great Imbibwe Ruins nar the aity of Misvingo

« the Notional Heroes Agre

«the Chinheyi Caves in Chinboy

+ the Khami Ruins naar Bulawayo

= the Victoda Falls, alsoknown as Mosi-eostunya

\ Vik:torics Falls



--- Page 11 ---
i Speak and write E i

alg also
Tell the class about other heritage sites hist you kmiow using: the
word alsa.
Say it like this:

The Great Zimbabwe Ruins is a heiftage site. The National Heroes
Acres also a heflfage site:
2. Teflthe class aboutyour two fiends: using theword alse.
Say it Intwo sentences ke This:
_ is my friend. __ bales my friend.
3. look at this pall of senlences
| Tike swimming vane much. | risa like fishing,
Using thie word also vale your own paiis ol sentences about:
« the twa ih 7s that, you like to do
« the two games that you enjoy playing {or} watching
= the two school subjects that you dislike
= the two hentoges sites youwould like fo visit
«the fwe famous people you would love Io meet,

lrcevexilend bank. receive motorists cyclisls |
pedestians automated feller machine quete
hesitage fourisis cule tiistory reISOn

| intes esting huge deposits withdrawals:

when shoglsdpenad, the ledmeis {in}
Shamie's class had ményintéresting | i
stores to, tell. This b what Shamie 1
told ker class: .
During the holidays, | travelledto the T
chyof Masvingo. went thereto visit T5
ray aunt, Mana, Aunt Moria works 2
in a bark. $he Bs a bank teller. Her ©.
jeb i to pay out meney to people ©

making withdrawals from The bank.
Making a withdrawal Is faking money from your bank



--- Page 12 ---
7 Speak and write IE

Using dlso i»
1. Tell the cos ohout otter heritage tes thal you mow using |
word (alsa.
Sery It like: this:

The Graal Zimbatywe Roms is a heritage le. The Mational Heroes.
Acre is also @ heifage site.
2. Tell tha elas dbolit your two fiends using the word also.
Say it In two sertences Me this:
__ ismy friend. is also ry friend.
3. look al this alr of tentencey
[ike swirnming very much; | alse like fishing.
Using the word dso write your ewn pairs of sentences about:
+ the two things that you [ke te do
= the two.gomses thet you.enjoy playing (an watching
= the tweschool subjects thot you dislike
= the two heritage shies you would like: tey visit
= Hg hwo famous people you would [ove ta meet,

Shamie fells her story
Chavicllod beans receive rovotorists cy lists
pedesiiiens automated teri mae [ine ue |
heritage tourist culture history [reason
intaresting huge deposits withdrawals

Whiznshools opened, ihe leamsm in
Shamie's classhadmanyinteresfing |
stories to tell. This Is what Shamie 2
bufing the holidays; 1travelled tothe |
cityof Masvinge. | wen there fo visit -
my aunt, Marly. Aunt Mario works [52
in © Bank. She is.a bank teller. Her ©
job is to pay. out money to people TT
making withdrawals from the bank = -
Making a withirawal is taking koto frofn your bank doount. She:



--- Page 13 ---
ako receives money daposils: Deposits.are money put into a bank
aceourt. Aunt Mana [ves ina flat en the third floor of a fall building.
Everyday I enjoyed locking oui -throlgh the Window arid seeing the
busy roads wath motorists, cyclists as well os pedestrians,

‘One day. Aunt Maria took me to the bank where she works. There
were people standing In a queue A queue is a line of people veaiting
to do something. The peaple were withdrawing cash from an ATM.
An ATM Is an outdmoted feller machine.

One weekend, Aunt: Mari Fook me fo the Grea Zimbabwe Ruins
near the city of Masvingo. The Great Zimbabwe Ruins are a famous
heritage site. A heritage site is. a place that is a very important part ol
‘our history and culture. There, 1 sow the huge stone walls.

| dlse mel many tourists from Japon, America, Chiro, dnd Europe.
Tourists dre peck Visiting ploces for pledsira, Aurtt Mona tald me
thet tourists Bring a lot of money inta The couniry. Money from other
countries is called foreign currency. Fer that reason tourists are good
to our country. | really enjoyed my holiday visil to Masvingo.

Kida these questions in full, coanec! senlences.
1. When did Shame visit Aunt Maria?

2 Aun Marioworksinea_

3, whe re toes Aunt Marid live in Mesvingo?
4. What is a quaue?
5

&

7

‘What i a heritage site?

Why are tourists good for the counlry?
Tourists are people who

A. stand ind gle,

B. come fo Mawvings

C. visit places for pleasure.

LCi. come from other countries

Complete these sentences with words from the passage
Ta help vou. the first ietler of the word i given;

.ahove.,



--- Page 14 ---
he RL

People travelling by moter cors are called m -
People travelling on bicycles ang called. ©

“gople traveling on foot arecalled p
People who travel fo visit places on holiday are & called 1 = =
AQ isa line of people waiting ta do something.

on in BLP

At wotks in'a bank receiving and paying ouf money to
the pease.

shortstary about what you gid during the school
holidays. |
= Start bysaying: During @ hehdidoys: _

Compal paragraphs, in 6-10 nes under the. heoding: What | did
during the holidays. To help'you, make use of words like:

| dining went sow med also. everyday before
afier that while thee wos becayse but

when dike entfoyed ofa: played

[ Kr Listen and speck

The shorfi sound of y
[i] Sometimes y hasashort i sound asin baby
Example: A hungry mon is on angfy men.

Say these words correctly. The yin them has a short § sound,
story heavy pyjamas Tory quickly somy happy wony huey

5ay your own words with a shot y sound,
[fl Sometimes they has a lang sound as in ery.
Example: With my own ayes. | sow a big python lying in the dry
ras.
‘Say do words correctly. The y in them hos a long Tsound.
cycle: deny ep GET goodbye
apply dye. Supply comply frying



--- Page 15 ---
Revision and cssessment 1 |

D Listen |
Look ened Naten as your teacher reads this paragraph aloud:

The farmer and his money
There was: a farmer who kept all his meney in a fin that he: buried
under a bigstene. One day some thieves came and stole the fin with |
all the money Inside. The farmer-oried aloud all day. His: neighbours |
came and he told Ther why be was crying. The neighbours were very |
sory for the farmer. They odvised him fo keep his maney in the bank |
|“ where itis sate:

Answer the following queslions in lull comect sentences.
i. ‘Whefe did the farmer keep dll his monay?

2, Why was the former crying aloud?

3. Whawere sony for the famer?

4 Wht d did the neighbours aclvise the farmer?

Rewrite these sentences correctly in the pasi tense.

I. Everydoy people doa fot of work in their groups:
Yesterday the people

2, Every year riany touists ge to see the: Victoria Falls,
Last year

3. Every moming, the workers go to work | on foot,
Along time ¢ ago _.._ .

14, EBversday we i= igh sun setting.

| Yesterday

15. Every holiday | visit my aurtn NGHGD. Town,

| lesthefidayl



--- Page 16 ---
[ (When the rain comes!

When the rain comes.

With the patfering sounds:

If brings [oy and new life

To animzis ond plants.
Farmers plant theircrops,
And fishermen lay their nets.
The streams fil Up again.

And the fish swim up-stredm. i

There is green grass everywhens,

For the hungry animals to feed an.

Maw letivos spiral ram free branches,

The insects and the birds all sing willy joy.

There will bs plenty of fruits to edt,
When the rain comes!

Using because
From the poer When he rin comes, answer ¢och of the questions

beluw in one-senfence. In your answers, use the word because.
The fist:one hasbeen done for you.as an example.

1.

LE REN

Why are the farmers hoppy when the rain comes?

Théx farmers are happy because hey can plant thelr Crops.

Why are the fishermen Heppy when the rain comes?

Why are the emimels- hoppy when the rain comes?

Why are:thie birds ond insects happy when ha rain commas?
Why are you happy when the rain comes?



--- Page 17 ---
|» Read and speak
Take turns to read and recite the poem When the rain comes Tluently.

Using hey, their and there
Say these hres words conecity. after your teacher: they, fhe, thers,

Say the sentences of this shor paragraph after your teacher

(Two parents and thei chiidren wire
walking down the road, As they were
walking. cong fhwzy hear a big noke
fron behind, They al lumed and looked
brick, but there were only two old men
with their walking sticks.

In nthe. — above;
« they refers to people or thing. for-axample; They [fhe people)
heard a noise.

« thelk talls us whose it is, for exemple, Parents talk to hel children.
. thexn efersloaplace ora ay far example, Thete wae only two
eld men.

~ Speak: Exira mile

bl we sentences in which you use they. heir and there
. | can see-three boys. They are playing with. a ball.

2 | have fwo sisters. Their names are Sarah and Thangle.

a, | visited my auntin Mutare, went there by bus:

Complete i the sentences using they. their or there,
1. The people of fimbabwe love country.
2. The boys have come. are waiting outside.

(10,
[



--- Page 18 ---
The nver Is faraway, butramgeing on fool,
In wiriter some frees [ose legives.

Haw many doys are. in tha month of March?
While _ were asleep. we were busy working.

ls ___ any: drinking water in the: Ng?

Wi stood up to greet the visitors whigh omved,

9 Listen and speak )

Look and listen carefully as your teacher tells and shows you about the
English-alphabet.

This Exigish alphitie Fics 26 kettets.

Say the names of the lefters in the English alphabet after the teacher:
Aq Bb Cc [rel Le Ff (3g
Oo Pp Qq Rr Ss Tt Hu
Vy Ww Xx Yy Zz

Learn fo say all the nemes of the letters in the English alphtibet In their
alphabetical aeder. Copy the letters of the alphabetinio your books,

A diciiondiy )
Your teacher will show you a book called a dictionary. A dictionary is
a book with: words and their meanings. | Ina dictionary; the words are

grroiged in alphabetical carder. Write the words below In alphabetical
order. the first are Has been done for you os an example:
The: first ward is. absent as it starls with a which is the first letter in the
English alphatet,

garage difficul  betwesn fomous absent
| Soctor carry adst



--- Page 19 ---
Groote or learnans. In your grou, Wife a. paragraph about each
of the: four people. Whiting 3-4-sentences which say something about

each one of ihem. Write about these learners inthe dliphabetical order
of thei fish names,

Wire ks This: ]

The learners: In my. group
There are: (how many] leamensinmy FoR The first learner
is HefShea _ _  _HelSh yes old,

The: next is . Shefhe ss _

Ld

HE r— — ee

Thethicclleomens® _ | He/Sheis

The jong u sound in oo
Insome words the vo hove along sourid ©
Excmiple: The haboernsinithe zoo are not foolish animals.

Say these words correctly. The oo in them have a long u. sound:
afternoan moenlight bridegroom schol MICH cartoons
brog pool tools ole g) ao boists



--- Page 20 ---
1@ rain comes: Part 2

Joram tells his story
"herding calle postures dengerous  sireom ]
yambulance thunder lighining Notded wild! i

After listening to Shamie. fhe class listened to Joram's story of the
holidays.

| spent the holidays in my viloge with my parerits. Therains had come
and we were very busy planting crops in the fields. Sometimes, | was
herding my falher's catlle and goats Inthe pastures, Herding cattle
wis a lat of fun with fends In the pastures. Besides, there were [ots of
wild fruits to pick from the fall frees that grow in the pastures. [tis very
dangerous to climb up these tall fruit Irees. One boy tell from a tall Tut
ree and broke His arn. He was taken fo hospital in an ambulance,
Wild fruits are geting fever because paople dre cutting ‘down fruit
trees.



--- Page 21 ---
Sometimes there was heavy rain with thunder and lightning. My father
wamed us net fa-geo.out when there was thunder and lightring. He
said it is very dangerous to di or stand under the frees when there is
Ihurider and lighlping.

itis else very dangerous to crass flooded rivers and streams. One man
in our village was swept away by a flecded stream which he tied
to cross. He held en to a tree unl seme: people pulled him out with
along rope. Melhel ale warned Us hat to dink the water from the
Towing: stream, She said that the flowing water it the streams ond

rivers Is unsafe for dririking, It may lg look clear. but it may contain some
germs.

o— these questions in full, correct sentences,

1. Where did Joram spend the holidays?

2. Withwhiom did Jeramspend the holidays?

3. Did Joram enjoy herding cattle and goals?.

4. Why ore the wild fruit freesgetting fewer in the forests?

5. Eitrsafefositor stand under a free when there is thunder and
ightning?

6. Would you dink the ficwing water in a river or stream? Why?

From pig is AGS
Iti trae that
OR
If is undrue that
--Jorom spent the: holidays In the: city with his friends.
_¢limbing tall trees is very dangerous:
‘grossing fiooded rivers and streams is very: dangerous.
_ the flowing water is the streams is safe for drinking.
N stinging ufider the free whan there i thunder and
"lighting: Is dongaraus.
~~ deram: Was happy that the people were cutfing down

the fruit frees.

Ema



--- Page 22 ---
rl. Joram was goad and helpful fo his parents. |
8. Joram enjoyed herding His father's cattle and goats

during the holidays.

The past tense
We use the: past tense to say what happened inthe past;

Complete the sentences by puting the werd in brackets in fhe past
lense.

1. Joram [tell] the class his story,

2. He {say} Ihe rains {coms} eady and they were planting,

3. Joram (hed) cattle with his fiers dnd he feryoy) it

4. Oneddva id {limi} & tree and (Fall).

5. Amanwas sweep) away by a flooded stream.

In the story Joram's father told the Boys whial not to do when there is
thunder and lighting. Take tums total the class what te do when there
is 1 Murder storm, Yeu can find out more: on the internet, from books
and magazines and other sources,

The comm (,) and the foll stop (.)
Read this paragraph gloud, pausing a little where there is @ comma 1)
and stopping where there is a full stop |}

The new: class
My name is Funanani, he group leader. In class | sit between d boy
and gif. The girl who sits on my right, Melisa. joined our class this
year. The other leamers.in my group are Samson: Tinaye: Ali and
Thandiwe. Ourchass teacher, Mr Zondo, says ‘that guriclass, with
only twenty-four learners, is the smallest class hie hds ever taught.



--- Page 23 ---
trom the paragraph dbove answer these: questions in full. comect

hos thres boys and three girls, Who is thot learner?

| |
A tole play

joined your class this y yaar. In the discussion you arg aking and telling

sentences.
1. How many learnets are in the group oltogethes?
7 Onwhich side of wetica does Funanani sit in class?
3. Who wale is paragicph?

4. WnateThe nome ol ine dossteather?

5. How many learners are in this class altogether?

Composition | |
Wie g story aboul what you did during a funder storm, Write the sfory

N 4.5 paragraphs,

—_

Revision and aateizment 2’ 2

| Listen carctully as your leachern describes one peassan, then say whe |
| that person is.

| For ex mple, Teacher says:

“I am tHinking of a learner Iv this class. Thal eamer k a gif. She is a
very smart and polite person, She comes to school on foot: Her home
is in the east of the school. In.class, she is q.group leads, Heer group

Imagine the! vou are i mn a discussion with one new [gamer who has

one another: about: name, home, age, fomily, past school, past

leac hess, Riends, games or spors and other things. Do this role play
in. pairs In front of thie class. Which pair had the best discussion?



--- Page 24 ---
Read this paragraph coteclly. Remember fo pause where there is o
comma and fo sap where there is a full stop.

A strange week for our group
Last week was a strange week for the: ame Irv my group: On
Monday. Melisa wds absent from school. On Tuesday, Taye, Al
Samson and | |, came very late to school, on ‘Wednesday, Thweden |
and Friday Thandiwe was ill ond absent from schoal. On Friday. ou
class teacher, Mr Zondo;olso fell il duing the: lessons and wos token |
16 the hospital.

1. From lho paragraph: A strange week for our group thot you have
redd cbove, write fhe answers fo these questions In full, correct
sentences
(a) Whowas absent from schogl en Motiday?

(b] Who came late to dnl on Tuesday?

{c) Onwhich days wigs Thondiweill and absent from school?
(dd) Why: Was Mr Zonda taken to hospital?

le) Wha'was || for three days’



--- Page 25 ---
D Listen and speak

Your teacher will jell you an. animal story In which the animals falk and
make sounds like people.

Answer these questions In full, connect sentences.

= Caonanimals folk like people?

« Do animali think?

» D6 animals siesp ike people?

+ Doanimals feel pain’ ke people?

= lsitright for people to beatikick/killthurt animals?

= Whichigyour favors animal?

- Imitgfe the sound made by your favorite arimal.

* Name any domestic onimet,

= Mame any wild animdl.

= Which animal would you:say is the most dangsrous?
« Which anirnal would you soy'is the best friend of ron? Why?

| Z Read

Read the following poem:
(Animal sounds

Where | lve,

In the rural areas,

Fer, far givay

We do not hear

The dull rumble of motor cars,

instead,
\ When thewind howls,



--- Page 26 ---
And the treelaaves rustle
As the rain pfters,

My caf mews

And the | doghb barks.

Before down
The couk Brows

And the duck quacks:
While the pig squeals: I
Then, far away. beyond the: hills,
A donkey brays |
And the COW moos
While the sheep bleat

| As the ion moar.

Verbs, the action words
Using verbs. from the poem Animal sounds above; complete the
sentences bhakow,

Thewind 7. The rain
Thecock 2. Motorcars

& Cow. ¢. Adog
Thesheep 10. The cat
Adonkey: 11. Apig _ |
Alon 12. Theduck

ppg |

Read ‘this story and answer ihe questions that follow.
‘As stubborn as a donkey”

stubbom  shength stupid water-proof sharp:
memory plough fenain tough frightened
scare highway wisdom conddion



--- Page 27 ---
Do you ef unury or nal when someone falls you, "You are o
donkey!?" Most people would nat like to. be called a donkey. Thisis
because mary people think a donkey so siupicd animal. The people
wha think lke that |
clo not know that'a hh

donkey his a very BUS ~

fe 4

sharp merary and
lots-of sfrength.

A donkey © © very |
shang animal. ||
pan camry heavy |
loads on its Bock,
of pull the farmer's
plough or ibaded | :
cart far mary | r ea

hows with ne: rest OL SE. I SEER TRES
in Batween, Donkeys are Qlso Known a5 ol ol terrier anirfials, Thal
means Thay dre gbile to live and walk in différant types of lands thal
could be hilly: sandy, dry or ough.

Donkeys are: very Clever animals too. A donkey will fot do something
thet If thinks is unsafe. This is @-sign of wisdom on the por) of dorkesy,

Dankeys have large ears hed hel to keep heir bodies cool in hol
conditions. Thess ome ears are also very Shere and con her other

dankeys bray from far away: They | Hairy
ean also hear HR motorists gd

food;

However, the donkey wil remain §
standing sfillin the middle ofthe busy” 5

highivay-simply. because donkeys Be
weer not easily seared of frightened,
That explains why some motorists
thir donkeys are stubbem animals.
Thiet explains why people say, |
‘as slubbom ds a donkey”.



--- Page 28 ---
Donkeys are dry weather animiok. Theyhote rain, Their skins notwater-
proaf and staying In the main not good for thelr health, Donkeys are
also herd arimals: Thisy are usually kept in a group.

Answer these questions.
1.

Why do most people: net want to becalied 'a donkey'?

why should donkeys stay away from rain?

wWhal helps donkeys to keep ifel bodies cool in hol condifiarns?
What does it migan to soy that a dorky is an "all ferain animal’?
State one thing: which shows that o donkey is a clever animal?

Choose the conrect CNSWes.

Thee passage on

A. matorsts on the: Highway

B. the dnywegltherand animals

C. ss pis and sfubbom pasple

The pass aga pg that dorkeys.

A. greclever and strong cmirrigls

B. have no enamies Thal ditock them

C: do riot five If groups.

D. are easly: seared or frightened

The passage also shows us that donkeys are

A. harmful animals B. wild:-animals

C. usesiul animals to pebple L. usgless animdls to people

D Listen |

Spuliing and dictation
Your feachief Will call out same words and one paragraph from As



--- Page 29 ---
What dees your dog do when it sees other dome

ky, 3/ Listen and speak

a shot] uv sound In oo
n. same words thie oo have g shar u Sound.
ample: The cook prepares food Hof looks very good.
Sony these words COTO The oo In them have a short u sound,
book foot hook wood ‘stood looking cooked firewood
untested Sentbol goodbye Cooked cooky looked

Com pon

swering these questions on the tte:
My dog
1* paragraph
Is a dog a domestic or a wild animal? Why? What'is the name of VEIT
tog? Whal fs the colour of your dog? & it male or female? How old Isit?

2% paragraph

Where do you keep your dog? What do. you fasd your dog on? W
does your dog ke? What does your dog dislike?

3 paragraph
Are fhere many. people who keep dogs in your area? Is your dog friends.

with other dogs? What dbes your dog do when it sees other dogs?
tic animals?

4" paragraph Ny
‘Why do you ke your.dog?



--- Page 30 ---
Ir

Read this pasvage and answer the questions thot follow:
| Mr Churu was a hardworking man. Every seoson people fiocked lo

his piece of land 10 buy tomotaes. Mr Chung had wo sons who

helped him fo grow the tomatoes. The two sons however, did not

enjoy working on the: land. They wanted to'go and loek for jobs in
the city.

Mi Chury theught ofa plan te keep his sgnsworking on the piece of

land. Before he-died, Mr Chun tald his sons that there was Treasure

an the piece of land. Treasure is a collection of something that is

valuable, like gold or diamonds. When the two sorts heard this they
were very excited.

After the death of their father the two brothers started di igging on
the plete of land. Balore they: found Ihe freasure, the rain came
and the two sons planted tomatoes on the piece of land which
they had dug. They got ¢ bumper harvest of healthy tomatoes.
They seid the tomatoes and gol q lot.of money.

Thetis wher the twosons realized whal thelr father meantwhen he
said there was treasure on the piece of land.

Choose the comet answer.

¥. MrChury wis a
A. cityman  B farmer C. miner D. poorman



--- Page 31 ---
2. Mr Chury was wellknown for
| ‘A. histwesons
B. the gold arid diamonds on his piece of dnd
C. growing and seling good tematogs
D, his sudden death
3. Fim the story Mr Chury was .
A. old B: cruel Cr. wiser D: leary
4, WHicH of hate wards tells us hol many people wenl lo buy
tomatoes from Mr Churu? oo
A. Flocked B.Hordworking C.Tracsure 1D. Enjoy
5%. Hew many people worked on Mr Chur! 's pieceof land?
A, Ong B. Two Clhee [D.More thon hee.
6. What really did the hwo sors wari?
A. The death of their father,
B. Tego tothe city.
C. The burner harvest of tomaloes,
D. Tocontinue working on the land.
7. Aller fhe deoth of théir father, the two sons dug on the piece. of
land
A, looking for the treasure B. In erder to plont tomatoes
C. because the rainhad come D. with the Help of the villagers:
8 What dies this stoi teach the Young boys and girs of today?
A. To be excited when aur parents speak to them.
B. To look for jobs in the city: where there are bright lights.
C: That: work on the land is only for their parents.
Du That it pays to work herd on thie land,

In. numbers 9- 20 choose the most sultable word io complete
the sentence,

9. Thepeoplestooding long. wailing to be served.

A crowd B. gioup  €. tuege D. eircle

1a. A Is somieons ravellng on fool.
A. tours B. pusseriger C. tycist DL pedeshion
+ Bung the hold days, went fo the city arid the traffic fights.
A, sory B. see Cowes [seeing

12. Hata SEE will plant their crops whan the rin _
A. come B. comes C. tame DB. coming

13. Everytennl, _@ letter to my uricle who works in the city.

A, writing E: writes B. written

write



--- Page 32 ---
Ky mather

A corned B, promised CT. angry BD. wamed
15. Bur dog whenever IT sees shangers:

A. roars B. crows C. barks D. thuriders
14 People use umbrellas when the weathers,

A, fine B. wet Cc. cold 0. dry
17. Wesawa big boot thigdake.

A. sailing B. pp C. swimming  D. rising
18. Wewentong Joumey b By« car.

A. wide TE fal . leng DB. high
19. The shephord was looking after a of sheep,

A flock B. herd C. troop 0. kraal
20. Good children obey _ paresis.

A. they B. there  C. their B. ‘them

Read this passage and answer the questions which follow,
The rise of Mwale's family

lA man called Mwale-
lived with his family
ina small brick hut in
la village. Mwale got
a little money. from
the small jobs he end |
His familly did for the
people in the village.
The family did not
eve much money
to buy rigw clothes |
ike the other families “~—— = =
wha lived in the some village. Male and Fig Tamiy lived To—
although they did nat have much money.



--- Page 33 ---
One-day the Male family cleaned a neighbour's yard and was paid
ad few dollars, with thet [litle money. hey boughta hen. Soon IHe Hien
| lid & clozen eggs which al hatched info twelve: healthy. chicks, The
“hicks grew info chickens and began laying eggs 100. Mwdile wars

selfing the eggs ond geting a lot of roney:

dairy cows produced d (of of milk which the farnily wis.also selling.

The: Mwate family hod enoligh maney to buy a plot. On tha plot they
kept more dairy cows for milk arid mote chickens for eggs. On this
plot they also bullt a big house. They wire now obile to buy enough
good food and clothes for themselves. The [fe story of Mwale's family:

i.a 'rags fo fiches” story.

From the story above, choose the conrect answer lor numbers 21-28.
21. Af thiebeginning, Mwale and His family
A. fived in a big house.on a plol
B. [ved ina smal hut in the viloge
©. were beggars
D. ‘wiorked fora neighbour
22. What Wa the first thing hot the Mwale famity. baught?
A, Adozen chickens B. A hen
B. Two dairy cows. Oo. A snal plot
| 23; ‘which of these words mearis a.group of twelve things?
C. Dozen D. Rich
24. A person who fives next door toyousyour
neighbour 2. friend
95, Which of these words from the story means te become more
| and mote’? |
A: Healthy B. Amount
C. Incregse (2. Laid
26, The word ‘plot inthisstotymeonsa___ =
A. good plan B. piece of land
B. small job C. ‘big house



--- Page 34 ---
f27. Fram history. we canisay that the Mwale family was o

c. generous D. wise

28. Which of these is a suitable |
Mis farnity?
A. From tags to fiches B, Diy cows.
B. Keeping chickens D. 5elimgeqgs

ieading for the story of Mwale and

in numbers 29-33 choose the comect answer from the four given,

No pdrent kes @ child who is as as a donkey.
A strong ‘8, diy €. noisy D. slubbaorn

306. She was wearing a dress that was as as the legves,
A. new B green C. fine DO. true

3. Ournew leecher ls & mionied wontan colled Maya.
A. Mr OB. Miss. CME D. Sif | NB
| could not liff the box because it was too. for me:
A. heavy: B. old C. strong Ci many

33. Inwinder many peoplesnigy by the fireside.

A. Sat B, §fting C. sit 0, sits

Read {his passage and answer the questions thal follow,

Every year we hear of many people killed by lightning. De you know
what to do when thete Is Tghtning? Here are some tips to help kéep
| you safe during lightning.

When there isiightning; the safest thing todo is to stay inside a building.
It 5 also sate fo sit inside a car or any vehicle with rubber wheel.
Once inside, sity away fron the doors and the windows. Do not be
if cantact with. metals like buckets or wafer tops. (fis dangsarous to
Use electric gadgets like irons ond stoves. during lightning. Switch off

things like televisions and computers:



--- Page 35 ---
Lightning usually strikes the tallest object nthe area. You should
avold being nan open area where you are the lallest object. I!
i dangerous to seek shelter under a tree during fightriing. It is also
dangerous to stand near poles thal camy electric lines:

Lightning is elechicity in the air. During lighting pacpie should stay
away from objects that conduct slacticity, Objects thal conduct

electricity include waar, fences, and metal objects. Thetatorne, it is
not safe to take o both dung lightning.

From the pamsage. choose the comect aniwers tor questions 34-38,

A. kills any people every year B, strikes tall objects.only
C. isuseful to people © D:lsharmisss to people
15. [norder to be safe during lightning. peeple should _.
A. go and stand outsice their housas ]

B. segkshelterin buildings and carson rubber wheels

CC. seek shelfar under the res

0. talk to one anather on their phones

36. During lightning, people should

A. switch on the phones, ielevisions. ond stoves



--- Page 36 ---
E. fioke a bath ar a shower
GC. stand underor near the poles.of power ines.
B. net da dl the thingssald’ nA Band C above:
37. Which of the people below is more likely fo be hit by lightning
during a thlnclarsteren?
Av Acwomen sitting ino bys.
B.A man standing on a Fileghy earil-hill,
CC. A child reading a book inside the house:
OD. A Bay in acaor,
38. Wrich word from the passage frieans ‘not safe’?
A. Lisgktrideie B. Thunder  C. Strikes B. Doingerons

In numbers 39-40 choose the comect answer.
39. Which of these words come first in alphabetical order?
A. Gwin RB. Chipinge €. Bulowayo D. Fitakusi
46, Which of fhe following senlences is witten corey?
| A. wes raining on fMondiry Tuesday and Wednesday.
2 If was reining on matiday; Juesday: wind Wadnasday
. It weeds raining. on Manday Tuesaday dnd Wednasday.
5 it was raining an Moridoy, Tuesday amd Wedtesday.

English Paper 2 Time: hour 45 minutes

Read the possage below and answer the questions thal follow,

Muslims: follow.a religion called slam. [here are over.a billion Muslims
all over the wetled, Jam fs the Tein radon: n Shee, Nidle East and iy

fis i thie par prephiet and badd of kam. ‘Mohammad grew Hip
as an-erphan, Lato, Be maricd o tich widow called Khadija.

The teaehings-of Ilarm-are walter in the Koran. This is the Kosim Holy
| Book. Muslims must pray together on Fridays. They dio must p Rey



--- Page 37 ---
“fivis Himes everyday facing She dire tion af Mec, Mec, a City |
Ih a country called Arabic, is lam’ 5 Frialy cily, fhe Imam legds in Ihe
prayers-at-a Muslim church called a mosque.

In {Heit IIfetime, all-atie dusliens must ge on a pllaimage lo MBGsa.
A pilgrimage i a holy journey a porson makes tea holy place
pray. Nowadays many pilgrims rave! lo Mecga every year to pray.
There they pray near a special place called the Kaaba, in a large:
moscue.

puslirs: are: very strict with their ieligion. In the month they call the
Ramadan, all Muslims are fasting, During the fasting, they donot eal
or. drink anything during daylight hows, That means rio food or drinks
batween dawn and dusk. pMusiims strengly beligve that all things

Lelong to Allah. Therefore, all things should be shared by all the
prerople, For is reason, Modlin gives food, clothes or even monoy to
Phe pees,

Section 1:
Answer all the guestions 1-10 in ull, cone? senionces.
1. Whit care thie Kagslings?
2. How Often should a Muslim pray every doy?
3. What ly the Muslim haly ify?
4. where is the Muslim holy cily?-
5. ‘What is:g pilgrimage?



--- Page 38 ---
‘Whats the name of the Muslirn God?
. Which book should ore ead in orderto learn mors about Islam?
Why do Muslims-give: aris tothe poor?

9. What time fz dusk?

10. The leads prayers ina mosque,

Section 2

A. Write o summary [10°15] rigs of the passage about Blam that
YO, have read sbove: urider the heading islam.

Note: in g summary, you write only the most important things and
leoveout the rast. You migy use the ideas below:
-whiat itis, what they believe in, their God
- its greatest prophet, its holy biook, house of prayer, its holy. day
-some of the Muslim pric ices.

B. In 3-4-paragraphs;in 10-15 lings, wile a composition under the:
hegding: MyselL

It you wish, you may wiite your composition by onswering these

questions in Tull

1" paragraph: Are youw a gr or a boy and what gre yourfull names?
Are you shar or fal? Are you darkflight' in complexion?
‘Where do youlive and wha do you live with? Are you the first/
second/ third child in a family. of how many children? Which
school do you go to? What areyour tavoule sulbjech?

2 paragraph: How do you spend most of your lime ot home?
Are you g friendly or unfriendly person? Who are your best
friends? What do: You enjoy doing: with your fiends? Do you
‘alse keep a pet dogleat as your friend?

3 paragraph: What is your greatest wish/hope inrlife? What are your
hopesiniife? What do you dislike? What would you do if you
got alot of money 1a spand?,



--- Page 39 ---
Answer these shot quesiions fiom your teacher:

- Did you take a bath this morning?

- Did'yau brush your leath affer eating?

- Bid you comb your hair?

- What did you eat before you carne 16 schog| this moming?

— What did you drink before you came 1a school this moming?

- What doyou do before you cross a busy road?
- is il seife or dangerous ta play on the road? Why?
i it safe or dangérous ta crass finoded rivers or streams? |

- sit sate or dangerousta climb tall frees? |

-  I5it safe to do sports like running with sharp ohjects, for example.
pencil in your pocket?

Read this passage and answer the quesiions that follow.

ahsence sickness iness through \
physical proven unprotecied injury i
practice hygiene protective decay
couses gumbools gloves J

‘We say thot someone is fit when that person isin good health. Good

hedith is Ihe absence of sickness or Niness. Its very important to keep
ourselves in good health all the time. One-of the best ways fo keep
ourselves healthy is through self-care. Self-care means taking good
care of ourselves. Through self-care we can prevent sickness or injury
and stay heallhy.



--- Page 40 ---
EL REC GF kde

ot fu TET =.
mmm py 5 paa
1 TTR ERE

1 ’

Self-caré also includes practicing. good hygiene. Hygiene is the
practice of cleanliness on ourselves, our clothes, our food, Gur water,
our homes and schools, Wearing clean clothes brushing teeth ufter
reals; washing harids before handling food. washing hands after
using the toilet are all Impartant for self-care.

People who practice good self-care do not drink unsdfe walter from
unprotected wells, Children who practice good self-care know that
editing sweets causes loolh decay.

Preventing injury is part of self-care. Many chiliren ara injured when,
they climb and then fall from tall tress. Mary people are injurad af
wrk because they donot wear protective clothes like gumboots on:
thalr feel, gloves aver their hunts or glasses over heir eyes.



--- Page 41 ---
Choose the cored answes..

1. Selffcorel
A. taking good care of ourselves in order to stay ingood health
B. working without Gy protec five clothes
. people: who are not In good hedlth

1
AF

0. someons faking riedisineg.
2. This pasioge ison .
A. how to climb fall frees
B. which sweets are good for children
& haw to stay healthy and good hygiene
to fall from fall trees safely:
3. Tas passage aba tells us
A. To drink water Freim any wells
B. to wash.our hands before - the failet
cy to brush our teeth bafore medls
to wash our hands before: handling food
4. id decay car be caused by 5
&;, Baling sweats
B; drinking water from unsafe wells
Cc. nol exerciEing
D. notwedring protective clothes
§. Which per of the Ld do we Lig when we wear ook?
Whe there: is hygiene Hirai.
A sickness B. Injury c. Jeanimess: BD.

Tel the.class two Things that people must do and two things they must
not da in ‘order to stay healihy, Use some of theideas you read about
in the passage: Sell-care.

Begin lke this: . -
In order tostay Redihy we rust. We alsa must . We must
net. ond, RE



--- Page 42 ---
Nouns
Lock at his shart passage: }

+ idawar is a man whose: wife has died. Mr
Ch 1 Mibires i olel= He: hod good | hegith and enough wealth
for F himself. His wealth Was mode upoft td flock of sheep that gove him
plenty of meat throughout the vear I he i Wanted g money, he op! sold

one of his. sheep. Herding the flock:
Choto.as i gave him a lat of joy.

All the underined wards inthe possage atiove are nouns Nouns ore
naming words, They name things, places. onimols and people.

Underline: the nouns in these sentences.
1. 1 ksep our clothes clean,
wu sho ie drink safe weiter,

Editing 100 many sweets causes tooth decay.

You should with your hands before hance fing foo,
We should keep our homes clean.

Any chicinsn get Injured when hey fdll rom trees.
Gloves | protect our hands.

NegRLes

Adjectives

jectiveis award thal tells Us more about a noun;
Bromplas: a happy man
a healthy person
a wealthy: ctief,
[all the wards in'celour ore adigetives).
Here gre some cdjectives: Use them In sentences of your own.

r -

heavy long rich old fas! proud new sitong short |



--- Page 43 ---
Complete the passage below hy fling in the ‘emply. spaces using
adjectives hom {he box above. Use cach adjective once.

The rich man and his new lorry
The _ manhssld his _ lomy and bought @ one. The ich man
Sas that he new loys - Band He says that the new lorry con
carry ____ loads and con travel distorices i na time. Theirigh
mary Is very ___of hig new'car,

In 8~12 lines, write a summary of whal you read aboul in Self-care.
Use'the following: ideas

- what self-cdre Bond #simportanice
-  spharts.gs 4 form of self-care

-  hygieénain self-care

© even fing fnjury.



--- Page 44 ---
Your feacher will explain fo you what good manners are,

Good manners mean;

«  beélng polite and respactul
» cores! behaviour in public
» good social behaviour,

] Complete these sentences with the words ... good manners of ...

bod manners, a ee
fis to geal people and 1a sgy, "Good-bye" when yoli leave.
tis toshout when you speak to people.

Mis to'say, "Please," when you araasking for something.

His not fo'cover your mouth of nese when You yawn, cough

Its to chew with your mouth T

itis tosay, ‘Bexcuse ms whan Vou want others to give WoL wiry.
His ___ to plok your nose or ears in public,
tig ta give vour seat to elders on public franspoft like bilses, or

In.churches.

tis tospeak to people when your meuth is full of food.
It is to pen doors for other people.

speak and write Bf

Polite requests
Learn fo makes polite requests when you wold like other patple’s help.
ror example:

to work out a difficult question in Mathematics,

to find your way to.a place that you would like to go ta,
lo know someone's name, surname; age or date of birth,
to kivow the Time of day, the date or the day of the week,
to know the price of something thal is om sdle,



--- Page 45 ---
te ses someone's things, for example, pencil, rubber molar, book,
-  tesitwith someane; arshiore somathing with tiie owner of the thing,
- todo something that you wold like to do.
I} Use the longuage ramewarics 1 the box below a make nollie
ues
Would vou please tellme | whist
Do you happen to know wens:
Wouldyouplegsehelpmeto, [when
Would you please who _ _
May | please: i how fo/fmuch
Dey yar ming if | whether
why |

{i} Using lhe languege rameworks chove, writes fiver senfences In
wiile:i you are meking polite requests,

Read Hs diglogre in threes: the nonaior, Joma and Mr Jamelia,
Juma ond the teacher

“rbyenst PHL enpugly  freling mien fon ariel

stomach anived nee mainte upoicgise docior



--- Page 46 ---
Namalor Juma was absent fram school on Monday. On Tuesday he

wes late tor sehool. When Juma anf
teacher, Mr James: spoke to-him.

ad at the school, his

Jury | arn:samy; sir, for being absent from school yesterday. |

Ar Jumiela, Why were you absent from schoal vests

would aise like to apologise for coming late: this moming

arday, Juma?

Jumer: I'wes nat feeling well, sir. | had o running stomach all

night on Sunday. ©n Menday marming my other tock
ne la the doctor. The doctor gave mean ihjection and
ordered bed rest for me for the whole d day yesterday.
Thal is why | did not come to'school yesterday.

tr Jumelo: Ohl lam very soy that you hod a running stomach. | go

hope that you are now well enaugh to join fhe rest of the
‘elas.

Juma 0H, ves, sil Lam feeling baller would not like to miss

lessons laday. Besides, the pain | had yasterday is all gone:

Mr Jawa If the pain you were feeling yesterday is all gone, then

whyareyou late for lessons today?

Juri; Sif; | gin very sony Tor that, This meming | passed through

the efimic: Tha 5 whiy | and: late for lessons.

Mi Jamel: seg! | gm happy thc you are ple il and fine. The

lescarrers in your aroun wil help you to do the exercises
‘wi did yesterday.

Jyh: Thankyou, sid lamsure my Friencts wil help me: fo.calch

up with [he rest, Ye always Help edeh other,

Choose the oouect answer,

Jug wasa

A. lary by B. buoy with good Manners.
C. boy wifybad mimners-  B., boy who had no'ftends

What kind of a tacchar would you say Mr Jarmeld was?

A. A cruel teacher, B. ASIC teacher,

{C. A Kihd teacher, 0D. A rough teacher.
Ju md: was ctr from schiogl on.

A 8 Monday
- pede] 3, ETHER and Tuesday



--- Page 47 ---
&. The other children In Juma's class were
A ead and vary uninendly children
B. good and helpful childrer:
oy aways camming lale to school
D. nit going to Relp Juma te catch up
5, kt died Juma come late for lessons?
& The teachervwashappy that Juma was finally. ened
7. How would Juma catch Up with efhiars?

Wao:ds with the silent 1
Read the following pussage. Note that the bold t is silent.
| often hasten

Mother offer sends me lo fetch water from the borehole. | fasten my
bel, stretch my legs and Rastan out of eur thalched hut to the borehole,
rent the bulchee's shop As | walk through the bushes | listen and hear
the leaves usile and the birds whishie. The whisiling is like a Christrnas
carol. When | stop to wich, | see a mother bird feeding its hastings

that just hatched. Fist the mother bird misistens the food to:soffen if
before ie nesting swallow it.

Chobse 5 words with — from the passage. Wilts 5 Siieasa using
the words,



--- Page 48 ---
A A composition

Ir 2-3 paragraphs. 8-12 lines write a composiion under the heading

The day | wets absent from school,

Below are some ideas fo help you:

« whon were you absent from school? (day, dofe. term. yeor,
weather or season)!

Why you were You absent? {reason, what caused that, how)

= howdid youspentihe day you were absent framisehoel frioming,
afternaon, evening)

- what were vou missing oll day? (what you missed oll day, what you
‘theught about)

= ‘what you advise other school children fo da or het to dao,

Spelling ond dictofion
Your tedehier will call out wards and sentences from the poem 1 Offen
while you write them.

Coal capi lieben cetrefully ay fle feechos reads Me porate Glens,
Keepin g fime
Do you know The saying, “Time is money?" This saying means that

lke Morey. tire ls precious. Just as wie spend money: wisely, we
ust glso spend tiie Wisely. It lst reds That we must keep time.

eeping Time means that we should not be late for schaol, church
or. appointments. Late comers always disturb others when they walk
in after thesstorting time. It is bad manners to be late and keep other
pope waiting for you. That is why yeu must apologise whenever
you ares late.



--- Page 49 ---
From Ihe passage; write the comec! meanings of the words used,

1.

|

A. at a. giver lime

The word 'précious’ means
A, very little: EB, not ot important
Ld very valuable D. encugh

An appointment is:an agreement {0 see someone
B. late In the diay

C.. whom you knew: D: whom you do not know.
To. apologise. isfo

AL be late TB t be ina hurry

C. say sorry D. to distuit

F
HH

wi hwy painen pap kes at

g fime rit IH TE TH HE (HT 1 {TH sl,

Apologising
Preterid that'you are latetorschool. Go tothe teacher and opologlse,

giving the re

sons) why you are lafe,



--- Page 50 ---
Your teccher will fell you abms Zimbabwe's nations! heroes cod

heroines:

= Who they are: men (heroes) and women [hergings) who have
been brave for the good of the country and tha people.

= Some of them: names of some of the henge and heroines,

* How we honour Them: rigme streels, 1 5 and places: affer them,
celebrafe Heroes" Diy,

Reod the passage below and answer the questions that follow,
Cur national heroes and heroines

| liberolion queariilas  falal anchor preacher
polifical disabilly independence acre baskely
association honou! laundry apportunifies

The heroes end herainas of dmbobwe
remembered ‘In mary ways, Orie way of
remembening them is to build statyes of them.
Another way is to name places after them.
Bulawayo gipert Js named after Joshug
Maabuke Nkemo, one of Zimbabwe's national
‘herses: Steels and raods have been named
after the heroes and herpines, Some of these
‘are: Josian Tongogara, Herbert Chifepo, ond
Mbuya Nehanda. Wea honolr our heraes and’
heroines on Heroes' Day every year, Heroes’
Day is celebrated on the sacend Monday: of



--- Page 51 ---
August every yaar, Do you know the date for this year's Heroes’ Day
celebrations?
Joshua Nkomo

re = ; 0 1

Joshua Maabukd Nyongolo Nkamo,
popularly known as Pothier Zimbabwe’,
or ‘Undaly Wethy' i. another well-
known hero of Zimbabwe. He was bern
on 1%June 1217 in Bukalanga, seuth-easf
of Plumfree in. Mdlabealaland South. His:
father, Thomas Nyarigolo Nkamio was a
preacher and cattle rancher.

daéshua Mgahiuko Nyongolo Nkomo
was the leader of ZAPU, a political party that was fighting for the
independence of Zimbabwa. He was dso the leader of ZIPRA. the
military wing of ZAPU. IPRA freedom fighters tought many: battles
against the whites, leading to the indepéndence of Zimbabwe.
After independance; Joshua Maabuke Nyongolo Nkomo became a.
government minister and then a vice-president of Zimbabwe: He died
on 1 July: 1992, and is buried at the National Herces® Acre: in Harare:

Josiah Tongogara
Josich Tongogara is another Zimbabwean hero: He was: bornin Shurugwi
1 he Midlands Province on 4 February 1938. Josiah Tongegers arew uw
an a fam owned bya white farmer called lan Smith wha lester Bee
thie prime mirister of Rhodesia. Josiah's pares. were wrkig csicioaurer
an the farm.

When he grew up. Josioh Tongogara went
lo Zambia, From Zambia heswent fo China
where he got his military training. Wher
he relurmed Hie besane the leader of the
iberation fighters known ds guerillas,

Josiah Tongogora was killed in a fatal
read accident on 26 December 1979, just
four months before the independence of
Zimbobwe: He [s buiied dt the Nafiorial
Herogs Acre In Harare.



--- Page 52 ---
Jaros Jirl
‘Anather national hero, Jalres Tn, was bom on é June in Bikita District,
WMesyingo. Jaros Jirfounded the Jalras il Assacidtion fortiie bind and

pacple with disability,

3,
3 In the Jaros Jin centres, people [iving
Ii- with ‘blindness and other forms of
yl disabilfies learn fo support tihermsehres
51 throuah gricLture, woodwork
iis metalwark, bdskelry, sewing, poultry.
0 laundry, music and many other

activities: These activities give hope

and opportunilies ta the people
es Iving with disabllifies. They learn that
i J cisability is not inability.
= Al the time of his death on 12 November 1982. there were siktéen
2 Jaros: Jil centres spread right across Zimbabwe. Many people. visi
a thease centers tasen wha The people ving with disabilifles can do for
cl themselves.
wi,
iad Choose the conect answer.

1. A herolsa penson wid
A. doessomaihing great-and rave for the good of the people:

B. Kills many people

C. Tights in awe

D. is rich and has many ehildren,
2. What deyou think the word ‘military’ refers 16?
| A. The independence bla county.

B. The leader of a political purty,
©. Activities ke ogicuttune. poultny, music and woodwork.
D. Peaple fighting wars with weapans llke:guns and bombs.



--- Page 53 ---
3. Who is oiso known as"Fathern Zimbabwia' or ‘Umdolo Wethu'?
A. Jains Hi oo
8. Joshua Mogatoka Myongolo Mkdmo
C. Josiah Tengogora
D. Thoms Nyengolo Nkomo
4. What do you think the saying, ‘Disability & notinotilty' means?
A. People ving with disabilities are- unable toda anything tor
ihiemselves.
B. Ohly peopk: iving with blincingss ore the d disabled people.
c. Pacplewith iisg Lilies are able to do many things forthenmselves.
D. People with disabilities should not do any work.
5. Who of hese people was a rained soldier?
A, Joshue Mgobuko Nyengolo Nkomo:
B. Jaros it
€. Josiah Tongogata
0. Mbuya Nehanda

Specking about the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe
Use the table below to talk about some of tHe heroes ond heroines of
Zimbabwe, Inciudeall the information provided for eqgh person.

Key: M— male F—femaole

Nomeolfhe  |Sex|Ditecibith |  Sloreoflidh | Daleol |
hero heralne death
Hebert Cite. 1510851923 Myarige in Mariscleinid e097
Jean’ Hyapheapihic hd ! 152 | Plumitres; Matoboleitnd

pGye. ~ South | ZEIT
Safty Hoyfron Mugabe I5 DEA0EA$3] | Chiara in We West / Affics zine]
George Siundiko MC panes | Plumes, Malobeleiond |

| | | South (R104/1981
Leepeld Takawir Me 188 Chirumicanzu, Midiands Pr. | 1970
Sion Vengo Mizenda [8 | 28/10/1922 | Gulu, Mesvinge Province 20/0972003

Ruth Chirgmane | i671 1925| Coe ou, south Alea | 2/017 EQ gid Ol

= —i —— — —



--- Page 54 ---
Eclsor) rivobge

| Lookout, Morph
Ciao Chitepa ~~ F 27/03/1738 [South Ati | bBjo4raes

Sirmioin. Mirna MM 1933 Mhdantar, |

maskiemainnd West

Jeshraarricl AdaFUyamic F 180RFEF | Matdba,; Matobsietand |

Hkemo [South

al | 1071935 | Masvingo Provinie LAOH 2004
RE Or/04tions | Matabelaland Provinces 50471985

Geonge Nyandero | MM, BATS 928 | Chitiates Dict, J
I Mashonaland 1 2406/1994.
Soloman Rex’ CoM] Oa/oBfID4S | Cikomba, i

I Tok valde | MW | 0/1/1947 |Masdngo Province | 16/02/2004

Amoth-Chivgdmbe | M | 25m9/1950. Ndanga, ACEVINGO

Poh futru fashendlarid F Ecist VRAOE2011

Mathers Shotuyéiisa |

fA | PETE saber | armszara

John Landa Nkoma | 20/08/1998 | Mdtobelskig Soul | 17/01/2013

leaf Chinaman: | M | wonep1922 | E | Epworth, Horore 01/10/1984
Jessoh Mila | OM | 0612/1923 [Chiweshe,

| kacshicinakand DOB 2007

Complete the paragraph below using informafion from the table.
is one of Iimbabwe's National herces/herpines. Hs/She
wis bam oni i HR { place] | He/She died onfin
. Al the time of his/her death hefshe wos

years-old.

# Read and write IE

Plurals of same nouns
we talk of one hero and many hetoes,

Look oat this sholl passage:

The plans that give us tomatoes and potaioes ara just small bushes:
Unilke: these smoll tomo and poiato bushes, mangoes are pe: the
thick branches of big frees, The tomatoes and the mangoes ore picked



--- Page 55 ---
‘with ils puppies, It has four puppies.

and packed into wioeden boxes of metal dishes. The dishern ond the
boxes are then transported fo the markets in lores or on the tools of
thie vurdl buses.
Note: we add -¢s to nouns thal end with «0, sx, ch, «x on —sh.
Rewrite these senfences with ihe tgh! plural Tor The souns in brackels.
Peopleuse different types of (brush) fo sweeps ihe (Church).
mony football [coach] of belh (sex) were former football players
thermiselves.

All fbuginess) must pty [tax] to the state.

All the: [dress] sewn by he class have decgrative: {siiteh) an therm.
The (crash) of many. (Bus) are caused by high speed.

Ad work, mary, (boss) wear expensive wrist watch).

Sortie (class) do thier tessons in classrooms with old (bench).

a.
&.

Ging its and ifs
Read the paragraph

My dog
| hove arpel. It's ¢ black female dog.
is tall is short. Right now it's al home
It feeds #s puppies on milk. | hope it's

happy. i's my best friend Together
with Bs four putisies.

i's Is ei short form for its.

Fs ls a passessive pronoun. shows sonsthing belongs to somethin g.

Rewrite these sentences filling in Hs or its.

1. Our country changed ‘nanive from Rhgsdesia fo Zimbabwe at
dependence: |

2. Oh. l had forgotten that sports day today.

3. Thotear logks very old, but_ ____wheselsare new,

4. Ourschoolis beautiful. _ surounded by pine frees.



--- Page 56 ---
5 This is. big tree: ‘branches ore many.
6. [hove found my lest book; but some of pages are missing.

Composition

Bra YEU know thiat vou can have:
A school hevo/heroine, forexarmple, insports, 6r the one who saved
asrmiall child fram danger?

» A community hero/heroine wha does something great. and brave:
for the: people for example, digging a well, stopping a huge firs.

planting trees for the people, sdving a child from drowning?

n 2-3 paragraphs. in 8 - 15 lines write o composition about:
al A school hero/heroine or

iW your Sompsasiton, write:
the nome, ‘sex {man of woman). age ond place of birth, family.
Appearance

= what made him/her a hero/heroine: [give the full story]

= what fhe people ore saying. any new ndme given fo the Hero/
Hergihg

= what you have learned from what the haro/heroine did.

EE write: Extra mile

Arranging names in alphabetical order
These. are the names af some of the leamers In a clos. Arrange them
inalphabeatical order;

Joan Fara Chipo- Kuda
Isaac Bengani Moses Geoige ite
Abel Duaissy Elvis Herbert |



--- Page 57 ---
The home address:

In firs, redid whot the ctildren are saving to eqch other.

My names
Raniza Moya. | live 8
rt umber F324, :
| Magriba Stree.

iMkpEa [nv Gwen,

My mare is

Tanck Shoko, |
™ [vein Chikomo
Vilage: Makoni

Take fuss to fell the class your nome and home address.

Read the hiondly letter below and enswer the questions that tallow. !

[township kilometers blocks beautiful throwing
pathways  durewall prefect lavourife  Scionce

| choir Miss economics especially senior

| vbedient

| EE FY Hs] BE Eh

Fs


--- Page 58 ---
House Mumbar 55
Runyargrp Street
Lteko

14 April 2017

My dear Anna,

Tami very happy to write this letter about my new school in the tity of Masvinge.

‘My school is called Shakashe Primary School: It (sin Rujeko Township a few kilometers
south of the city. Our house: is very dose to the school The walk to school takes me

‘Shakashe is a beatiful seficiol surtoumnded by a high durawall. There are sight blocks |

of tlassrooms. and wide playgrounds. We keep the grounds clean: by not throwing
liner everywhere. We also pick up any litter from the grounds. We alsa plant beautiful
flowers aling the perhivays. |

The headedeher i Mr J J. Mera. My ETE Miss Goto: All our teachers]
wank polite, obedient and hardworking : tudents, YWe greet our teachers everyday and |
say goodbye whirt we go home.

There are forty-two | learners in my closs_ 1 am the Shee ) prefect My favourite subject
5 dence, Lalso enjoy ¢ g Home Feonomics, especially cocking and baking. The/
ashe lay. TN Ll games arc sports. Think i

= our sports rn ay,

Cl

[3

| Please, tell me about Your school. How re you? I om ery well

-
Your loving friend



--- Page 59 ---
Answer these questions in full, comes? sentences.

| E Write )

1. "Who wrote this letter? |
To whom was 1his letter written?
When was Hs letter written?
Where: Shakgshe Primary School?

Where does Susan live im Masvingo?

Wiis Is he head of Shakashe Primary School?

on Bp

Answer these quesfions from the leffer you read.

1. Why ls Susan never laie torschool?

2. ‘What do people in d Ehair do? |
3. What dayissports day ai Shakashe Primary School?
4. ‘Weich ore Susan's favourite subjects?

5. Which ore your favourite subjects?

5. Why do.dll the chiidren al Shakashe: know Rugaere?

7. Explain whether children oi Shakashe ore polite of in polite?

8 Explain whether children at Shakashe keep th ir school clean or

' » Read and speak

Look of the layout of the ffiendly fetter you have reed and do. the

following: : |

. Soy the full Home address of the person who wrote: this letter

- Say the date when this letter wos sifitten

. Soy what separates fhe addess and the date, (hen the date ond
{ie greeting a

Soyy thie greeting used in this letter Lo

Say. how marly paragraphs make the bady of the letter

say the ending of the letter ~~

‘Sei ihe noms of the person wha wrote This deter



--- Page 60 ---
‘Writing © Fendly ietfo:
imagine the lefterwritten by Susan was written to you. Write in reply fo
that letter teling herabout your own schoel.

Start by saying: - Co I.
Thank you for your letter telling me about your school, | wish fo tell vou
about ~

Remember to layout your letter well.

Jsing some and others

Listen as one of you reads this shott paragraph: |
Near my hams, there isa small plot with many trees: Some trees are tall,
othersare short. Some trees are thick. others are thin. Somes trees hove
lavas, oifien hove no leaves, Some teas give us fruits, others da not
give us any fruits.

Rules: We always say some first before we say ofhers.
We do not use others on its own without fist saying some.



--- Page 61 ---
Say your ow senlences Lisingy strme and others.

Alsing — and others make your own seniences using the nouns listed
below. Choose only FIVE words To write aboul,

( children parents tegchers molotears days roads 4
| Fouses farms fruits stories shoes people |

Example: Some roads inthe city are wide, and offers are narrow.

| Revision and assessment 5

| D Listen |

Listen carefully as some legmerns read to you the life stories of some of
Fimbabwe's herpes and heroines. Answer the questions the teacher
will ask aboul each oneof the heroes and hersines.

Molding callte requests
Usitg could. may, would, de, pleasure, and’ excuse me Ok other
learners in your class for something in a pelite way.

Read this paragraph (luenily.
Heroes a and heroines of Imbabwe

CA We, 05 Q aid erioy tha font Te to. do vilkicd we ptt Fie
of our heroes and heroines. That is why we salute them; or give praise
land respect 10 them.



--- Page 62 ---
rect meanings of These words from the paragraph |

Heroesdre  {rrenfvomen/atres).

Hercines are (men/women/ places). |

Selfish means [thinking and caring aboul onesalf/ikinkin gand
caring about others).

Fragdomisthe [rightto do whatyou wemnt/ie respect given |
tothe Reraes). Co
In this paragraph. lo salle means (Yo.give prake and respect/
to torget something},

ee say f | iid lost their lives when they hove [died/worked



--- Page 63 ---
mone isin cima mony and en answer the questions Ia follow.
The Eagle and the Rabbit
chissiTenyineg sees espe eles vies clearteaen
| Lrosiunoioly virid reakshaii alfiweugh eagle
approgehing  salely drown neither reaches
[J
wad

Once upon a hima Eagle arid Ratabait were feaghizour, Eeagyler liven] ry
tl tyres nest on a few: Bremen of 0 hee, That i where she bod Tod [Ble]
says. Rabbit's lone wes just below. the low branch under Eagle's nest.
Although they lived next 10 etch other, they were not friends, They
neither talked to, nor greeted adel other



--- Page 64 ---
One day thera wosahuge veld fire. The fire was burning and destroying
all the grass and the trees. Many insects, birds:and animals were
running awry from the approaching fire; Eagle esi

sided to move her
eggs out of danger. Unferfunately. Eagle ould nat cay the eggs on
hér own,

Eagle b begged Rabbit, “Please Rabbit; carry my eggs across the fiver,
away from the dariger” The Rabbit Just fumed. away. He ran towards
the ive, Qwicy from the fire leaving the edgle’s eggs fo burr.

Rabbit got to the fiver and found it flooded. Ha knew that if he fled
to eross the loaded river he would drown, He alsa knew thot there
were crocodiles in the water

Then. Rabbif saw Eagle flying just above him, He begged. “Please
Eagle, cany me across the flooded fiver before the fre reaches hams"

Eagle replied. "One goed lum deserves another You should have
agreed to camy my eggs to safety first, Now | would alsa be willing fo
cary you across fhe flooded fiver.

Preme— guesfions comechy.

i. The English proverb ‘One good tum deserves another means.
iy people are. very unkind to-each other

8, Its ho use erying when you have a problem

¢ if you do not ak for help whist you have a problem, natody
wil help you UE |
Dn il you are goad to other peaple, they will alo be good to you,
Where did Eagle ve?

Was the engle in the story male of female? Why?

Whit does the word ‘dangar” In the story refer to?

Would vu say Eagle and Robbil were good or b bad neightiours?
Why?

Why: dic! Rabbit fail to cross the river?

naw

o~



--- Page 65 ---
B. ‘Wha does this: story teach we?

7. What do you fhink happened fo Rabbit in tive: end?

Telling stunies | N
Take furs to tell ihe class some animal stores.

PE:

Begin your story like Ihis: Once upon d time _ a
Encl vour story Tike this: This story teaches us _ =

ry gor
look of this sentence from ihe story:
They neither reilved to, nor greeied each other.

ead the di idiogyet below:

ks your mather a

soldier or a police |

pificer?. My Fgther ls

| weithar of soldiet
Hor a palice

officer. thaisa

Choose the conoct ARSWer.
“My father i§ neither a soldier nora policeman,”
the father is nota a loll= &
the father 1s not a policeman
thie father is both a soldier and o policeman
ather § pet a soldier and not a pollcernan alse:

©

®p

20

-



--- Page 66 ---
Note: Use neither ... nor to say thot something is not true of two people
Or wie thirds.

Using neither ... nor glve the answers to these questions, then say the
correct thing.

Example: The weather is neither cold nor hot today. Its windy,
The means that the weather is not cold and nét het; but windy.
I$ 7t a Saturday or a Sunday teday?

Arews inthe month-of Januoryor Decemiper now?

Dass a monkey or a baboon ive in the water”:

5 Gwen or Mutare the largest city in Imbabwe?

Have you ever been to India or to Japan?

Are Tomer Freddy your friend?

Pn A go pH

+ Read and speak

The short sound 0 as in words like and, man, had, and marry.
Recite this poem camecily with your friends.

A memy mein
A memy man got marmed.
He: married o nosy Women
Ata meny ‘wedding,
By the seq side
with mary merry men and women
Who had come-tosee.
MIGY Man Mary Mery Woman.

Lok at these pair of words from the poem above:
marry /memy toefsea

Each pair of words sounds the same; but the words mean different
things. Theyare aise spell diferently. They are culled homophones.



--- Page 67 ---
Choose the conect woed to complete the sentences.

I. Thewind__ awaymy___ hat. (blue/blew)

2. They_ thethiefandtockhimtotheviloge: - [eourffcaught]
3. She gave him. a ard __herto the the t workel. (sent/

ht)

4. ltEneg forthebus 10 fst every week. (foiiffare)

5 last |hodafueandwasvery | [weok/wesk)

6. She____ herfather would buy hera uniform for coming
first in the: n the athletics completions (krievefrew)

7. He Heshouldcoverhis___ whendnaezing. {noselmows)

8. Theyilieda on the bandages so thatit would fall off.
(not/knot)

Read and then rewrite the mathematical words below in alphabetical
order:

| reclungle kite Hiangle circle square |
diameler parimetsr  ohlonyg hechare J

in 3-4 gros of 10-15 fines waite you own composition of animal
story. Give your story a suflable heading.

Harndwiling
Copy the sentences below Into your books using Nelson Script:
One good turn deserves another. If you are good to other people they will

alse be good ta jou



--- Page 68 ---
Lo:

as It keeps our bodies codl and alive. Witheut water In our bodies, we

Read this peisoge und answer the questions thal follow:
Our bodies have a lot of water in them. This water ls useful and vid)

witla tle, The loves eof the water in LIT bexclies [i called detiydratian.

¢ or danger of denydration

gresatestin the hotsummer season.
This is when the temperatures sear. Temparatune [5 the dogres of
heat or cold. In summer, mony children suffer from dehydration, They
lose a lot of water from their bodies as they play and run around in
| the Heat. Here dre some hints to aveid dehydration:



--- Page 69 ---
[ »

Always drink:a lot of water as you play or work. Theswater you:
dink will replace the water you lose through sweal.

Fat d lot of fissh: vegetables and fruits. Fruits lke Waterrneloni,
mangoes, paw paws, cucumbers have a let of water in them,
Reduce sweating by wearing light clothes. Work and’ play in
the:shode. Make swimming yoursport during the hot months in
summer. When you are swimming. you do netsweal, Therefore.
you do Hotiose any water from your body:

| inquesions 1 & choose the contec answer rem the passage.
I.

Debydrations
A. a kind of sport, playad by the chilciken
B. a kind of frit that grows im summer

(C. the lois of tos much water from our bodies

I. sweating
The word "vital" in the first paragrophmeans __
A. very impartant B. useless C. fod much D. young.
The word ‘soar’ in the second paragraph means 2
A. small,
B. play ond run around
& go down

ao up or fise
bh degree of heot or coldness is colle. i
A. danger B. temperature ©. summer I. loss of life
Another word that means the some as the word ‘risk’ Is

“A. danger B. section C. water D. sweat

To avoid dehydration, children should
drink lots of water

eat lets of dry food

mike SWIMMING thai sport In winter
sweat a lot

inguesfions 7 20 choose the conectanswer focomplete the sentences

7.

Motonsts are people traveling

Ee

A. bytrdin BE enfoot C. by miotorvehickas D. by aerapianes.



--- Page 70 ---
An elephant a animal.

A. huge 2. lang C. tiny D, thin

| # Tourists enjoy visiting ond naw places,
AL S8E B. seeing c. sey DV. saw

10. The farmers will start picirifing their | crops whan the rains _
A. come  B.coming C. comes D. came

tH. Itisvery to cross flooded rivers. |
A, safe B. dark C. hegvy [I demgerous
12: People who travel on foot are called
A, toursls  B.vsitors  C.pedesfians D. passengers

13 Yesterday father was busy the broken fence.
A. mending B. mended C. rmerid D: mends
14. Ths drawiec inthe pool he could net swim.
A. otherwise BF of because D. after

| 15. Paras should love children.

A, thelr B. they C: there he
"$6, He has a sharp and can remember

WIS Sac], Co

A. semses  B. sight  & behaviour  D. memory
7. Good healthisthe of diseases.

Ac presence B. absence (C. pain I. medicine

12. People af work should wear __ clothing like glasses,
Gloves, ar gumbiuols. Co
A. Clean B: protective ©. new OD. eld

| 19: You should B when you hove dane somsihing wrong.
B.complain 'C. apologise D. reply
vwasdbsenl school an Priddy.

B. to C. for 0. from

Read this passage and answer the quesfions that follow;

Many: school chlidren lank fatward to the school’ rolidays, They kake
the: school holidays as a time of freedorn. Some evan, think that-a
holiday is a time to rest and do ngthirig else. Schon holidays should:
never be o time for daing nothing. School children should plan wheat:
They are going ho do during the nies holidays. School children can



--- Page 71 ---
{ also take fima to visit friends and relatives during the holidays. Besides
visiting friends end relatives, there are glsomany placesof interest to
‘sit iniour own areas.

These places of interest include mountains, ivers, dams, and farests.
They. alo nclude factories or industries in the aren and mea: other
ploces. One'can go out fishing, looking forwild fruits or just sig Hissin.

In numbers 21-26 choose the answers from the pass
above,
21. Thispossagesis about
A. the Jobs thst people can
i. school holidays
©. visiting fiends amd relatives.
Do. reading b book
22. The passage also shows us that many schost children
A. ke to-go on holiday
B& dislike schigol halldays
donot goon holiday
Bb. work: very hard:during the sahaol holidays
23. This passage Is'saying tht during the: holidays. school children
should
A. be dome nathing
B. any vist fiends and relatives
C. bedoing many different activities
B. sige dl the time:
. Which of these can schoo! children do during thie holidays?
Mi Go out stealing Frits.
8. Goto thelibran.toread books.
c. Sleep all day lorig.
D. Flay thraughioul The day.
25. How con school child keep his/her mind sharp and reddy for
the next term's school work? N
A. By making © list of things te do in the holidays.
B. 8yreading books.
C. By sleeping rricst of tie firme.
By doling mething.

nge you redd



--- Page 72 ---
“26. Wha! isthe meaning of this passage as a whale?

A. School holidays are bad for school.childien,
|B. School chidrenshould not go on holiday.

| C. Chien can make good use of Ihe school holidays:

| D. Chiltiien should fot be made towork during school holidays.

| In numbers 27 33 choose the conect answer.
| 27. Oursghoel _ won the music competitions.
A choir B. clos C. club 0. grade
28. After the sirong winds, The streeis were with piecss of
alee |
29. Some cf our national heroes are womenand are men.
A. some Boglhiars C. none 0. dll
36. My mothieris _ _ atsachernora nurse.
A. either B. neither  C. ar D. ‘ake
3. __ was a very bad day for ma.
A. Daily B. Tomorrow €. Yestercy 0. Now
32. Anoeroplonecantravel __ distancesina shor ime.
33. Jonas would lke To use THermba's pan for a shor while and then
retumil. How does Jonas ask for Themiba'senin a polite manner?
A. Where & your pen; Themba?
B. Thambe, to you have a pen? oo
C. May! please borow your pen for ashiort while, Themba?

D. | Give me your pen for a short while, Themba.

3

Read the poem below und answer the questions that follow.

Bad mister, good servant
Firat Oh; fired

Made by man

with mere firewood.

But, fire, oh fire! |
Very harmful you can be,
when out of control.

| You bun dawn your own maker To.ashes,



--- Page 73 ---
You déstroy your wn rmigkar's house,

You destroy the grass that feeds his animals,
Fven the frees that your maker planted.
Fire! Oh, fire]

What a Bad mioster vou ore!

Fresh: Qh, fire

How very.useful you can be,

‘When under conifroll [|]
You warm your mikes in the cold weather. |
You Bil your maker's weter,.

You roast your maker's meat,

sand cook his food,

You even light the cigarefie an his mouih.
Fire, oh frel |
‘What a.good servant you are

In numbers 34 - 37 choose lhe correct answers kom fhe poem.
34. This poe is talking about |
how fo moke a fire
2 what to do when there is no fire:
C. how harmful and how useful fire Ts
D. somone with cigarette onthe mouth:
5. When's fire & good servant?
A. Whanit i out of confrol,
RB. ‘When itis under control.
C. Only when the weather is cold.
[. Whe itis made of male firewood,
36. Wha do vou think is ‘the micker' inthis poem?
A Man B Fire: €. God 0. Animals:
37. Thispoem also shows us that when fire-is out of control, it _
A. lsvery useful
B. warms our bodies
C. is made of firewood
0. con be very harmful



--- Page 74 ---
tn manbors 38-40, . nose the correct answers.
38. ‘which of these sentences 5s corect?
A. Somegils are smart, others are dirty.
B.. Other girls are smart, some are dirty.
C. Some gils:are smart. some are dirty.
D. Other gilsare smior, others are dirty,
3%. In the alphabetic) andar, which of these hamies ome fist?
A. Perela B. ‘Major CT. Khupe B..Siwela
40. hie sentence k writen comachy?
A Capo; sekai, rude and fodzal were dll Bor in June:
B. Chipo sekal rude ond fadzai were all bom in June
E. Cri, Sekai. Rudo ond Fodzal were all bor iff June.
D. Chipo, Sakai, Ruda, and Fadzal wers all biom in ine.

English Paper 2 lime: thous 45 minutes

in 3 4 paragraphs, n8- 12lines write o letterto your brother or.dater
tefing him/her abe ut your new: fiend:

name, oge, looks, parents, home, school and closs, ‘why you fle
the fried



--- Page 75 ---
| A day of silly mistakes
| will never forget the day when | made silly rhiisictkes. It was Lecouss

I thought [was late tof school. | hate ta be late for school pypocially

when there Js merming paras, The school mates will call you sirange:

pames when you are late for moming parade.

Mother did not woke me up on {hat day. | dressed in great heisie.

without even washing my face. Then | picked a piece of cake that

mother had Baked. Mather akvays bakes good cakes for sale and

mites a kot of money from the sales. | did not even sil down fo take
tea with the coke:

Then, ity that state, Tran to school as | ate the pisce of cake. | just had
no lime Yo waste. | raced al a fast hut sale pace along he-pothiio
cehaol. When Loame fo the schodl gate, realised that | heck made a
silly mistake. | Heed put the fight shoe an ny left fesest mngd the ett shoe
on my right fost



--- Page 76 ---
| lnoked for a place to i while. |.corrected the silly mistake. Then, |
redlised that | had made another silly mistake. Th shoes | was wearing
enmy two feel weraniot ing same: Then | ake realised that itwas nol
& school Say; afleralll Whi! a day of silty mistakes!

Answer these questions rom He passage.

1. Why did the wiitier make dilly mistakes?

2, ‘Why did the writer hate missing moming parade?

. ‘What made the writer wake up late?

I dressed ingreat haste, How did the walter dress?

Wher! did the waiter realise his first mistake?

Which weds the sefond mistake that the wiiter rieglised he hod dong?

ikea

Silly mistakes | | | |
Tellthe class about a silly mistake you made one day.
Start like this:

Qredayl _ or

Cn [say when] | .

Magic &
Look and say only the words correctly after your decker Note that
mogic e rakes the a sty its. Rams.

1. mat/ hate. ce eeee sno MY Glossmicte and | sat ana mat when we mat,

20 alfate They come at neonond ate-gll the:Tryits,

3. hal/hate . Tile dirly hits.

4, pan/pane ........... Mother pul the hat pan nedr the window
pane.

5. badibade .........l bade goodbye to thebad guy.

b. fotffate................We shill do not know the: fate of the: fot man,

7. rotate...) now kbow ihe tote ar which the rol producesits

yaurg. anes.
B. SAMSOME. os Sam and | ore in fhe same class.



--- Page 77 ---
9. back ake ... ehecame back to bake cake forma.
10. snack/sriake... ST A shake came inte the rock where | was edaling
il. TIE ccna do nat know what made him mad like thot.

Magic & and a sound

n the passage A doy of silly mistakes, write down 10 different words
inwhich the e makes a say. its name asin snake’, AHerwards, read the
wigeels yeu Moses ower tan to tho class,

using the comma (.)

«We come to school ar Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday
and Friday.
Note:
I we use thecomma |) te separate names that we Write in d row
{ii} we write thie word ‘end’ In place of the comrfia Between fia
last tw riames,

Complete the following sentences pufiing In lhe comma (,) and the
word ‘and’ in the right places.

My foul bes! fiends af sch golge

The celours an the Zimbabwe National Rog dre .
The five cifies in Zimbabwe that would love to visit are:

Five examples of wild animals found in Zimbohwe ore

The fist schol! tem In Zimbabwe is during the mors of

Bob

Spelling and dictolion
Your tedeher will call out same wards and one pardgroph from A day
of silty mistakes as you write them.



--- Page 78 ---
hei he are day yall made some silty mistakes. ‘Write a composition
about the: sily mistakes you made as foflo WS
A-day of slily mistakes
On ___ [what day) lmiade [number of] silly mistakes.
First, | [explain the first. silly mistake) .

explain the next mistake).

Lastly | realized that {explain thie next silly mistake).

twill never forget that day.

Write: Exira mile

Writing ¢ paragraph
People are given sfronge names for ane reasan or ancther. Imagine
[heat you know someone who wos given o strange: names:
Write 1-2. paragraphs unclear ihe ‘heading A sitatige nang. In the
pamgaraphs) sq:
the real nome of the person wha wis given the strange rama
« the strange name that he/she was given
= whic gave Himfher the sironge nome
«why the person wads giver that strange nani,



--- Page 79 ---
Read this pessege in groups of five es: narrator, Mi Mebhana, Mis
Maher: luvendo and Bonga.

The Mabhena family

wise budge! precious decay  sedson
| prices fattened

Remrader Mr and Mrs Mabhena are wise: parents, Every sagas, they
fatten. caflle for sale. Thal daughter, Luyeando, ond thei
son, Banganl, help them to fulten the cattle, This sedson, the
Mabhend family sold five fattened cattle and got a lot of
meneay. They wed some of the money to: pay schaol fees for
Luyands and Bongani. They also-bought new school unifcirms
for thie hw chiledren,



--- Page 80 ---
Mes Mabhena: Luyando and Bongani, your father and | would ke to
thank yeu for helping in the fattening of the: cattle. We are dl
ging for shopping next weekend, | hope you wil enjoy thie

Fanganl Ohl Thats very good news. mother. | would ike to buy a big
ball te: play with ev frignds after schol, | would also like to buy
4 big toy ear and lols of sweets and many other things that |
will find inthe shops. | could disa buy either-an umbrella or a
ramcoat. it still have some money left I'll eat ai loa cream
tao,

waved: | would fike to buy a ldrige doll, o cellphone handset, some
surphongs, sunglasses, a new satchel, a picture book; a pencil

sharpener, g ruler. some biscuits-and many ‘other things, | would

also buy elfher a sunhat ora cap. My figrids have al these
things, anid | haven't got therm! oo

vie Mubhena: ‘Waitl Waifl'watt, my dear children! We do nat buy things
just because or fiends have them. We ako sheuld not byy
things that will harm us. Sweets may make our legth decay, We
should buy only those things That we need and dre usetul fo us,

Lyando: Ohl

Fongonl: Beall? -

Me Mabhena: Youshould ole not ge inte the shops and start looking

Terwhat ta buy. Instead, you decide what to buy beiore going

te the: shops. Money is precious. You do: not gel money easly
without working hard for it. When you get it you must spend if
wisely, |
A Mabhene: Let us sit-down and draw up-a budget for our shopping.
People wha do a budget before going out for shopping alwys
use their money wisely, oo
sayando. What is a budget, dad?
Songani: Ohl | know whal q budge! is, Luyando. We ledrned about
it at school. A budget is a wise plan for spending the money
that-ene has got. In a budget, we list the cost of each of the
important things on which Wwe would like to spend the money
that we have. Itis very important to do o budget first bafore
spending even a litle money.

Nanulor: The Mdbhena tamily sat down and started drawing up

their budget, They ade a list of everything they needed,



--- Page 81 ---
They pul the prices. They made sute they spent their money wisely.
They also put some money’ ride for use in future.

Answer these questions comectly.

1. How did the Mabhena family make money?

2. What will eating lots of sweets doto our teeth?
Whats go budget?

what do you do ina budget?

Luyeande and Bongan! were beng thanked for

It Is wise ta: buy things bBegause all your fiends hove them: Tue £
False?

Wien should you draw upc budget?

A. ‘Wren you hove spent all your maniey.

B. Before you start spending any money.

C. Only if you hove a [iffle money fo spend.

ins Rl when you have a lot of money 1o spend:

5 scusiion

1. sit wise fo buy ings [ust because efher people have got those
things?

2. What things should we buy?

Imagine Hhieit the ledrmers inn your group are children from one family.
Your parents have given yeu one hundred dollars {$100.00} to use for
VOUT QWwn needs.

Drow up a budget showing how you will spend the money. Remember
that in a budget, we list the cost of each of the important things on
which we would ike to spend he mensy that we hove.

Using If... will

Look at these sentences:

= if still Have some money left will eat an ice cream.

= [Flhave twenty dollars | will buy a pair of saheel shoes.



--- Page 82 ---
peer quisstion coreatly: What will vou Buy if you get ten

Complete. these sentences. Choose a suitable ending from the box.
IF't drew up-o' budget

figetseotd ____ |

If father dks for help help withthe cattle

if | have any money |eft

i you-ect too many sweets

L3

you will nave toolh decay. )
| will help hin gladty.

| will spend my money wisely.

| will wear a jacket.

| will buy a kite to ploy with,

Using either ... or

Look at these sentences:

»  lcould also buy either om umbrella or a ralcoat.
* [would also buy either d sunhat of a cap.

we use glther ... orto say two or more choices,

Use either... of to say:
[a] wha you will buy you hod ten dollars:

(bo), the Tends you would like to play with
{c). what you would like to be when vou arow up:
{d). the days of the week when you ge fo: church
[e) the places you would lke to visit,

Using I together with other people's names,
Lak dtihis sentence:
Luyanda.dnd | are nt the same cass.



--- Page 83 ---
Note: you mention the other person before 1,

Using 1 wrile one serdence in which;

(a) yeu do something with-your fifend everyday

(B) you wil go somewhere. with your brother or sister next week

[€] youdoa job everyday with your mother or father

{d) vouhepedapetsoniiving with blindness with: your ¢ousin yesterday
(el vou wil do some spor with your friend 6 school,

— iat last week you gamed some money. You then spent hat
rooney! wisely. In 3-4 paragraphs. in 10-12 fines, wile aletter to a fiend
- how much mongy you eamed ond how you gamed it

= how you Used the moriey wiely

« what the fiend can aso do Jo eam, Money.

Revision and assessment 7

Lisak, Tisten and soy lhewe semfencoes coprocily after yar leachern
11s bad rnanngrs to jurip on a bed,
The fen men were led by ashiort man,
We satan set of new sofas:
John's:ded is ded,
At thie end SFihie game, Mary and | were tired,
Mather bought @ pan and a pen.
Two fiends met and sat ona mal.
People are meny when they many.

EE IE EE BE NE BE EE



--- Page 84 ---
Read thoze words and paregiaph aloud conmecily.
Lai} ean ¢ofty jem many
has back ferry werniel hove

| hands panly am drank an

Lid mn ang His slack hat
h ie on Hin ht, That rade Sar

| ange Sri { He called His. —— 2 black edt ran after, and Eiled
frie fit ra rat Rls a hale oh his. black hat. At lost Sam ws.o-

newer these two questions using because in rach orswes.

A
1. Wh F “wariold Signs a sex men mat fisi?
x hy



--- Page 85 ---
Madam Greg visis Tmbatwe: Port

miiionoite tours magsificent culiure hesitage
boundary Hanguosge airpod shaighl  lhundors

Madam Greg lives in Armency. She is an American weman. Madam
Greg isa millionaire: A milionaireis a pemon with a million dollars or
mere. She is a very ach person.

Last year Madam Greg fravelied to Zimbabwe by air. She come as o
tourist. A tourist is.a person wha visi's places for pleasure. Every vear,
mary fownsts come to see ploces in Zimbabwe:

Tourists spend and legve a lof ef money in the country they vist. For
that reason, tourists are goed for the country. Madam Greg came to
Iimbabwe and visited many diferent places,

Madam: Greg kept g digry. In Her diary she wrote notes atiout what
she saw and did everyday while in Zimbabwe. This is what she wrote
inthe: diary an her first day in Timbabwe;

1s ely:
«Landed at the Viciorlo Falls Airport at 4230 hrs,
nbabwe tosee where all the places lam going

= Hired a car and a driver to. take me e around IimbaRwe.

i

0
i


--- Page 86 ---
Was driven straight fo thé mighty Victoria Falls on the: Tambed
River. The Victoria Falls ore o hertags site gre onthe northrwesiem
bountioly between Zimbabwe and Zambia. This heffage sfie, also
kniown as the Mosioa-turya 1b the local language which meds
"the stnoke that thungiers' isd very important place in the History
wnd cutture of the peas. The falls are about 1 700 metes wide
arg 108 metres high. Or What a ogrificent Sint fhe falls aret

IE Witte

Answer these quesiions cotreclly.

1. Wheredid Madam Greg come from?

2 Whotls a milongire?. Lo

How did Madam Greg fravel to Imbabwea?
Where are the Victor Falls?

what does the name Masi-oa-finy mean?

Roscarch ] ~
Find out abou! any one of the falrist oftcactions in Zimbabwe. You can
ask people, read books; read magazines. waich television of search ain

Ire interfiet for infarmation. Pre

TT esentashort speech iotheciassabout fhe
place, You can collect pctures to show the class durlhg your spesch. If

you have projectors you can use themin your speech.

Replace the underined phrase in each senience wiih one ward from
the pinssage that you read.

To help you, trig firshigtter of the ward is given.

1. Madom Greg is a very fich person with over a milion dollars:
2. Madam Greg isa person fromAmenica. [A__ |)

3. Amilignaie i someone whois net poor. (r }



--- Page 87 ---
4 Imbabywe is visited by mony people who travel fo places for
pleasure. (t =

5. Modem Greg kept a ‘book In which she wrate the events of avery
day. (d_

& The Victora Falls: ore a begulilul and w

grderiulsght. (m

Look at his Sanfncis

Macon Sreg tfrovelied to Zimbabwe by alr.

The word Travelled comes from the word travel,

Note That thedast eller ls doubled in the word before adding -edl.

Rewrle the iollowing sentences in the past lense by adding -ed after
doubling the last lofer af the end of the verb In brackets.

wher The rai {sitm) we went aul to play.

Yesterday, the hws heightic irs {quorel) again,

3. The new clothes fii her very wall..

4. Last winter, many leaves (crop) from the branches of the rées.
5. As thechidren plaved, they (skip) over a rope.

5: 8

teller lo 11 pontricnd
1 3-4 paragraphs, In 8-12 lines; write a letter te p penfiend who [ives
HF Tr Zribsebvwe, Try your

ster waite:
= what a heritage site is

ther names of some heritage sites and where they are in Zimbabwe
the pecple wha vee heritage sites
whic! people see at edchheritoge site.

(JE Write: Exira mile |

Describing © place

Using your notes from the research you did, wiite a Composition about
one founst attraction in Zimbabwe. Use the questions Below to help
you,



--- Page 88 ---
My favourite heritage site in Zimbabwe
| - Whats the'name of thie heritage site?

- What are the attroetions at the heritage site?

‘Why it your favourite?



--- Page 89 ---
second largest city after Ha
granite rocks with well-wooded valleys. | saw many kinds of birds and

ourists and fhe places they visit: Part 2

| EY, Listen and speak a

Answer these cussions correcily:

For what was Madam Grag coming Io Zimbakiwe?

Whigre was she coming from?

What nome is given 10 @ person who travels ta places on halidoy?
How did Madom Greg trove! to Iimbatawe?

What famous place did Madam Greg visit ori the first doy of her
stayindmbabewa?

Where 's thot place?

How was Madam Greg going lo travel to other placesin Zimbabwe?
What name is given to the book in which Madam Greg wrote the
daily events of Her stay inf Zimbabwe?

BN)

' nohional reserve granite merssive
| herilage Intemational

Madam Greg visits Zimbabwe: Part2
Madom Greg confinued writing in her diary about er visits To Giher

places in Zimbabwe.

2™ and 3 days . _ |

| spent the two days touring the Hwange National Park, about 170 km
south of the Victoria Falls. This Is the largest game reserve in Zimbabwe.
| saw elephants, lens, sopards, zebra. kudu, buffalo, giraffe, impalo

and many other wild animals,

4" day
Vigitad the Mdiobeo Hills, about 35 km sguth. of Bulawayo, fimbabwea's
mre; The capital. The Matobos ars beautiful



--- Page 90 ---
anirmols [lke hyesncas, ostriches, Bipsgsos, giraffe, os well os the bigiek and
wire rhinos.

| visited the Great Zimbabwe Ruins. 25 km to the south of Masvinge:
Irmbabiwe's oldest city. The Great Jimbabwe Rums are made up of
massive stone walls, Some of the stone walls ore on top of a hill and
afters are in the valley Beliw the hil, [his 5 1 very fameus henfage Sike
fromm which the country got its noms, Zimbabwe,

&" day

After Touring the Great Zimbabwe Ruins again In the morming, | ws
driven straighl 10 the: Heirare international Airport fo catch the: AVERT
fight back hone,

An we the following questions in full conect sexiencas.

1. ‘Where did Madam Grey spend the second ane [hie cloty of her
story in Amibzakmewe?

2. Where gre the Matobe Hills?

3. Which Ts the secand lorgest ity in Zimbabwe?

4. “Whe ore the Great armbahive Ruins made of?



--- Page 91 ---
5. Where dogs the ndme of the bali Zimbigkiwe: come from?

6. Wolcht is s mbobwe” 5s oldest clfy?

ays did Madam Grag stoy in Zimbabwa?

Reporing Co |

Report to the class whet Madar Greg did day by day. Remember to

use past tenses of the verbs: or doing: words: {what she did), Start likethis:
Or thesfirst diy, Matdom Greg visied the

Ther say a fw inferesting things she did or saw on thal day,

Using os well &5

Loak ct this sentence:

+ Modam Gmg mw many wild animals as well as birds.
This is the same as saying:

* Madam Greg saw many wild anirrals and birds.
Write three sentences of your own using: es well os

imagine that you were Madam Greg. In 3-4 paragraphs, in 8-12 fines,
wiite « letter To a friend telling the friend about your visit fo Zimbabwe.
Start your letter like this:

| have just returned from Zimbabwe where: | had gone on holiday.
Iimbabwe isa beautiful country with wonderful places to see. On the:
first day of my stayin Timbigbiwe:

Alphabehcal order

These are the ploces that Madam Greg visited in Zimbabwe:
Victoria Falls: Hwemge National Park

Mcitobyo Hills Great Zimbabwe Ruins



--- Page 92 ---
I Reswiites The sammees of these places infalphabelical aiden. Use the Sis]
| letter in the: long names.

Madam Greg comes from Americad. She is dri Armneridan.
1. A person Who: Comes from Aflicaisan .
2, A person who comesfrom Indigisarn :
3. A person who comes from Namibia sa

4. A person who comes from Zambia isa

5 A pmol who comes from Nigeiia ka

spelling J dictation
Your teachdr will call oul some words ahd one paragraph from Madam
Greg visits Zimbabwe while you write them,

Ravizion and assessment 8

he pes: AO as your teciches reads to you a paragraph about the
heroes and heroines of mbabwe. )
| Herpes and Aeroines of Zimbabwe
Imbobwe has both heroes and heroines. These are men and women
whio wars not sellish to think and care only about themselves. Many
| of these heroes and heroines leat thelr fives in the fight for reedom.
Today we, as a countryenjoy the right fo do wha! we want because |
of pur heroes and heroines. That is why we salute them, or give praise

and respect to them.
| You tind | can alin become heroes ard heroines if we werk hard 1o |
| improve the lives of our pedple.



--- Page 93 ---
Guess end witte. the meanings of the words in bold from the way they
are used in the paragraph Heroes and Herolties of Zimbabwe in Listen
above.

I
1. Hearoes are [menfwomen/acres),
2. Hewinescre.  men/women/places).

Selfish meghs: [thinking and caring about oneself/thicking |
andcaring about i athers).
4. Freedomthe {right To do what You warst/ihe réspec! given
to the heroes).
5. Inthis paragraph, tosalutemeans_ fto give praise-and respect
to forget something].
&. We say pepe lost their liveswhen hey have | (disd/Wworked/
7. To improve isto (micke something better/make something
| badfbe polite), A

Being polite
Using could; may, would, do, please, and excuse me ask your teacher
or other ledimers for something ina pelle way |



--- Page 94 ---
Your P— will fall vou the fife history of some sucoessiul peapie in fifo.
= whan ond where the parson was bom

« the schoo! history of that person

« what the successful pemsan in life is dong naw.

Reod this postage and answer the questions Thiol Jllow,

Teenagers
foamy oehive heemilul club knew edge

Bitlsifislits spoils

Teeriagers are the:young people betwsen thirteen and nineteen
years of age. They ae collsd legrugers because thera | igo ‘teen’ in
their years of age thirteen, up fo pingtesn,


--- Page 95 ---
Usually teenagers are active. This is because they hove g lof of energy.
Teenagers should we his eitergy in a good way. With this energy.
tegnagerns should toke part in spars ond.games: Taking part in sports
and games is race impartant than winning,

Teainagers can alse fake up good hobbies thot they enjoy doing

during thelr free time. One example of a good hobby is joining a
in reading club. The boys and gris ina reading club read ond exchange
books. The club: members meet from time to time. They discuss what
| they read in the books and share knowledge.

L Habhies ate good because they wil keep teenagers away from
harmful practices: Examples of harmful practices are drinking beer,
sonipking wind sex;

Teenager should be allowed fo enjoy their rights. Some teenage
its andl boys drop cut of school because they ame Forced into early
manages. This spoils the future-of the children. Children should refuse
tg gov info eardy marriages, They: should repr to the p police anyone
Bho sexually obises s them. They should ako feport
i forced into edly mariege. i

| ( Write |
Answes the following questians corecily,
1. Children belween the age of thileen ond ninetesn are
called.
| A. adults B. theoged C. hobboyp people DD. leanogers
2. Somsthing that is harmful
| Fy gives joy
B. brings suffering; unhappiness and.even death
C. &.agaod hobby
D. hase lot ol energy
3. Which of these practices i net harmful to teenage children?
A. Drinking beer
| B. Eady marmage
C. Sex
| D. Joining a reading club

whe They gre



--- Page 96 ---
4 Which of these is thes rrcst imprortant thirg inspon?
AL Winnirg B. Losing oo
Taking part I; Bacting LE your opponehls
5, Which ol these words from the passage means the opposite of passive’?
A. Active B. Edrly C. Miserable  D. Energy
&. What Iva hobby?
A, Surmething tht yea enjoy doing during your free fim.
B; Something that you are forced to de by ansther person:
€. An.early manage: for teenage girls.
D. ‘Aol thot needs.a lot.of energy.

Adding -ed io make the past tense of verbs

A boy scout wate what he ond his other scouts did when they went,
out comping, but he wrote In the present tense.

Read Ihe whole tepotl with the verbs in bold in the past fense ofier
Camping forthe scouts

Wa sitcho our tent and hoist the flog. Then we wali into the forest, As we

walk, welalk and laugh with each other Sometimes we play gomes,

Other times we [ump over thee bushes or kick the ball over the trees.

Ther, we el 055 a strearn with clearwater,



--- Page 97 ---
4. Which of these is the most impartant thing in spark?
A. ‘Winning. B. Losing
C. Takingpart I: Bealing up-your epponants.
g 5. Which ofthesewords from the pessage means the opposite of ‘passive’?
i ! A. Active  B. Early C. Miserable D. Energy
6. What is a Hobby? Bh
A. Something that you enjoy doing during your free time.
B. Something that you aradarced to do by ancther person,
C. ‘Aneary mariage for teenage girs.
D. Ajeb that needs a lol of energy.

Ad ft g -ed io make ie pes lense of verbs

A boy scout wrote what he and his ofher scouts did when they went
aut comping. but hevwrote inthe present tome:

Rend the whale report with the verbs in bold in the past fonse oils
aiding —ed,

Camping for the scouts
We pitchiour tent and holst the flag, Then we walk into the forest. Aswe
walk, we talk cmd laugh with each other. Sometimes we play games.
Other fimes we jump over the bushes or kick the ball over the tress.
Then, We G « Foss a stream with clear water,



--- Page 98 ---
=nil

ler

25.

BE wite: Eiko =

Using verbs fot add! -ed in the pastitense

Complete Ihe sentences ot nanging he verb in the brackets to its post
fonse.

IL When the win came, the farmers (plant) heir crops.

2. | {orush) my teeth after supper

3. In the past. many people (foil) the diving test.

4. This:moming we {boll} some water in a kettle.
4

Along time ago, people (sail) across the seas in wooden ships.
reexioy {A ry wester Bote with very cold water.

Using many cid much

{1 Redd the dialogue below in pairs and answer the questions below,

icin Lined frie
Heaez frindizh whiter,

[hisictiinils rid Sid i)” :
mich vector iin
PITTS bitte?

[cr] For which things. do We Lise: ens?
(bh) For which things do we use much?



--- Page 99 ---
Rule: We use:

many for things thot con be counted {countable things), for example
bottles.

much for things that cannot be: counted (uncountable. things). for
example, water.

i) In your groups, ask and answer each other questions: on the
following:
(a) days in last/Hisfnext month
(b) the ted you drank this moming
(c] the rainfall thal wi there lost season
(cd) the children/Boysigirs nour class
(e] the teachers/male/fernala nour school
if} thewaterin the dom,

Using many and much

Complete these sentences using mummy of much.

1. Hew children:are in the reading club?

2. How fre dd the children spent duting reading glub

~ mestings?
3. The boyswant to know how cays they will spend in sco!
Camp;

4, pda wasnat water the stream. bul there were.
Tish .

5. Thera was vegetation in the forest,

A. The scouts did not pack foed.

7. The scouts took fents with them,

| J Read and speak
The ® long Feound as in time, ine. bile, size

Hp il)

DR Coney; The i bas a 2lora pound. he Mik



--- Page 100 ---
n er shiepettyn; write with pride to invite

Five of the nine fends of mine that 1 ke:
To:come an site and sit outside with) =
In the prime sunshine that-suntise provides:

And smile while we enjoy the, good lifg

at no price!

BE Wiite: Extra mile

Using many and mych

Complete ihe following sentences using

3.
4

wn

many or much,

You have: EE hair an your head!

Tos _ sugar int your tea is unhaalthy.

How people live In your village?

Theres blood ing person's body, but | do not know how
There Engl _ Hime left before the holidoys.. Bo you know
Fig: days are elt?

How passengers cana: bus can cay?

ut your Hobby. Your compaosifion should

In 34g isla of ‘about 12-15 sentences, The heading of your
carmposition should Be My habliy,



--- Page 101 ---
| Rerid hls pemsage and answes ihe questions that follow.

The moon } h |
Tie moon is ore of the many |
natural objects of satellites, If
meives. in.space round the planet
earth en which we lve The
distance from the earth to the
moon is three hundred and Sigh.
| fou thousand, four hundred and
thre kilometres.

The moon Travels right round the
earth in just twenty-seven and a
third days. It travels at the speed of nearly four thousand kilometres
| per hour. That is eighteen times Ihe speed of our fastest cars.

The moan has ne Nght. It gets its light from the. sun. Sometimes the
earth comes Ih between the sun and the moe. Then the earth
prevents the:light from the sun getting fo the moon. When that
happens, the moan gives ng light at all. That is when we get the

eclipse of the moon. |

In 1944. a Russian space-craft landed on the moan. In 1969, Amarica



--- Page 102 ---
[ "sont three men. Vig the:moan ina space craft known as the Apol

| The first person fa Jand on The moon was Nell Armstrong, an American.
The surfgce of the moon about the same in grea asthe continert
of Africa. There 1 na rain that falls on the moon. The moon Is very
hot during the day and very cold at night. The surface of the maon
lsvery uneven, II has high mountains and deep valleys. The highest
paint ory the migon is Mons Hygen, i four thousand, seven hundred
masitres high. This § about half the height of Mount Everest, He highes!
mountain an earth,

In numbers 1 - 8 choose lhe cowect answer fram the passage you
have read above.
1. This passage is talking about

A. the moon

B. Mount Everas)

<. gn Aenean rian

D. the Apalin 11 space crafl |
2. ria far apart are the earth and the moan?

Three thousand, six hundred and eighty-thiee Klometres.

y Meaty four thousand klomeshes,

C. Only two hundred Kilometres.

0. Four thousand, seven hundred metres.
3. ‘Which of these statements is rue?

A. The first person to lord on the moon was a Russian.

B. The > earth travels round the moon Tn enty seven and d third

Cc. i Ae raitg on the moan,
| D. The migon travels very Sowiy.

4. The highest mouritain peak on earth is
A Mons Hygen
8. four thousand, seven hundred mefres high
C. Mount Everest
D. ‘vety close 10 the moat

5. The first man to step on the moon was.
A, a Russian
BE. MNeilArmsirong
D. Aptlle 17



--- Page 103 ---
9.

11.

14.

Aral B. af C, mistake 0. heat
Playing games is useful ard fe of time:
Ai. waste B. late C. good use 3. west
my mother is very good at good cokes.
A. Trying B. beking GC. boiling B. cooking
. Many children make the mistake ol wearing shoes

the opposite fest,
A. careful 8. wonderful C. childish D. cheap
ay sister, Janet, Isthe only. nour family.
A. child B. son C, brother 5. daughter
Father sold many catfle arid gol mney.
A. big B. mueh CL fiany 0. high

5. Moone getsmoney ___ without working hard forit.
A, nigel B. arsady C. hardly n. eosly
Tabeth, ded yeas is stil o teenager.
A fifteen 8. four CL. ten | D. twenly

| in numbers 7 — 22 choose the comect answers.

Ths story shows that the _ .
A. moan fs bigger that the whale earth

B. area of the moon § the same size os the totél oréa ef fhe |

earth

C. total ares of the edrih is mote that the fatal area of themoon
D. surface crea of the maori it level or fiat
The eclipse of the moon happens

A. at night when thessuriishot shining

B. when the earth gets inbetween the MOG: and fhe sun

C. when the sun getsing betweeri the earth and the moon

D. when theres ne rin oo

Frorn what you have: read in the passage; which statement i
rue?

A. Crops can gow well onthe moon,

RB. By the year 196%. many people had travelled to the moon. |
C. Cropsicannot grow on the moon.

D. The moon has its own light, just like: the sun,

Inwhich word does the letter ‘a’ have the:same sound asin The.
word dia?



--- Page 104 ---
17. Whal yeu erey doing more often during your free time is your

A. job B. duty. C. hobby D. game
18. The boyslayghedasihey along the road.
A. walk H. walked € C. walking DD. walks
19. Foothall is played by 1 ball,
A. kicking 8B. kick ©. kicked D, kicks
20. Youshould wher you feel ted,
A. rest B. rested ZL resting Dr, rests
21. |Last season, we got rainfall.
A. much B. mimy, 0. long 0. very mony
22. When the bus was the passengers moved aul slowly,
A. nmning  B. fost C. moving D. stationary

~ #& Read

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow,
The rhino

The rhino is a wild animal found’ in

Imbcbwe, The white and the black

rhino ore the two Kinds of things In

fimbabwe. The block rhina is, in foc

not black. it is grey in colour. Rhinos

bear young ones which they feed an

milk.

Rhinos are mere active duting the

night than during the day, Whenyou
see-a rhino, il looks heavy bubcan ran
at speeds around fifty Kiometres per
hour. Howéyér, d rhino rarely attacks
people, except in seft-defense or |
when itis protegting its calf, ad
During the day, a rhino spends most

af is ime feeding an the leqves af
Bushes or low trees. When # 5 not



--- Page 105 ---
I
in
id

(feeding, the ring spends the ime sleeping in the cool shade of frees,
Rhinos need to drink lots of water from time to time, That fs why rhinos
are always found within five kilometres of dveis orwater pools.

Rhifios seem to welcome the bird ds a passenger on their backs. The
oxpecker bird picks:and eats the ticks that are found on the rhing
skins. These ticks suck blood from the rir.

Rhires have few engmiss, like he lon and the hyena whe fry fo Kill
their calves. Man is by far the thino™s greatest enemy: People Kil
the thing forts ham which: is used as medicine, Today, the rhino is a
protected animal in Zimbabwe! It 5 profected against poachers whe
Use various weapons to kill If CT

From {he passage you have read above, choose the correct al

lof numba: 23-28.

23. What is a rhing?
A. An animal that feeds a an. other animals thet it kills,
B. Asmall animal lke re
C. A protected wid’ animal found i in Zirnbowe.
DO.. An animal that hvesin the water.

24. What is the frue colour of a black thing?

#. Black B. Grey
C. White D. The colour of the soil in which it ives:
25, Yh dios ‘mother rhina feeds coff an?
. smile.

ry Leaves from the bushesand low: frees.
C. The meat of the onirmeals it: kills,
0, The leks fond ar its back.
‘When does a rhino usually éHdck pee
A ‘When it Is hatf-cslesp.
B: Al night.

2. When itis defending liself or protecting fis calf.
D. When there are no lgaves 10 egl.

opie?



--- Page 106 ---
A. the pba bl
B. people
= the lions and the hyenas
. other mgiminmgs
: Which of these is a fiend of the rhing?
A. The elephani.
B. The: catile:

D, he's fini ‘irc.
29. Which of these statements is Tye?
A, Therhine is not wanted in Zimbabwe.
EB. The rhino isan important: animal inZimbabwe.
C. Rhinas Kil many peoplain Zimbabwe.
0. Rhings are herd ar group animals,

In mumbers 79-348 choose the corect answer,
30. Nowodays, many people byeor,
A. move B. widlk C. frovel Dv rury
In which ward does the letter i tigve the same sound ¢s in the
word ike?
A lick B. site C. bit D. picture
32. A milionaire is ¢ very person,
A, rch B. wichg C. kind 0, honest
33. Ansland ka Haft piece of larg water,
A under B: very near  C.owdthiout 0D. sumounced’
bye
eh, when there are ro clouds, the: full moon is very
A. colourful B. dark C. bright oO. quiet
Acperenmial river flows.
A. only fora short time in the year
B. ‘during the rainy season. only
€. ence ina year
D. throughout the whale year,



--- Page 107 ---
Read thls passage and answer fh questions that follow.

Keeping safe in the home:
| Many serous accidents happen in our homes. Mos! accidents are |
caused by whit people do or do nol dd in thelr homes, Every year
here are children who are butint, To prevent this, children should hat
be left alone near a fire oro hot object. People must glso put-aut any
burning fire in the house before going tosieep. This is done to prevent
the fire from burning the house while the-pecple are fast steep,
thelr houses destroyed when the people pul petrol or disse! in thelr |
lamps instead of paraffin.
| Drowning & another comtion ocident far children in the homes. |
| Children drigwn evertin the bath hubs or kitchen sinks. Children playing
| roar or In thie water should have an adult persan waiching them all
the firme.
Many children also get choked when thay swallow objects like bottle
tops, coins, or match sticks. Children should no! play with objects m
| their mouths. They also should notrun arsund with sharp objects like
knives, pencils; or pens In their hands and pockets. When they fall
“down, the sharp objects sometimes pierce through their stomdehs on
legs Infuning or even killing then.

In numbers 36-38 choose the conecl answers.

35. Which of these statements is rue? a
#. Theresare rio accidents that happen in the people's homes,
‘B. Accldenis cannot be prevented. |
C.. Accidents [ust iappen on ther own. they are not caused by

people. | |

D. Many occidents-are caused by what pesple do or donot

do.



--- Page 108 ---
| 37. To prevent children's accidents in the hamas, people should:

A, kee keep aelose watch enchildren playing in, or near water
B. allow their children fo ploy with objects in their mths
C. love burming fire 1s the house wher they go fo sleép
0. use peholin their parrafin kmps
. ‘Children should not
AL play or un areund with sharp objects i in their pockets
B. stay the rural ares Where paraffin lamps are used for
lighting ) | |
C. sit nearafire, even in the cold weather
I walkaround inthe houses on their own
Which of These can cause: accidents in seme homeas?
A, Taking & bath Ina beth tub,
B. Using petrol ar digsel cil in the lighting lamps.
C. Sleeping after putting aut any burning fires in the house.
D, Allowing the children to play.

Thess 39-40 ¢ choose the comrect answer,
sec! alphcbéehical order which of these names come

A fy T— B. Bindure OC. Zvishovane D. Kwelkwo:
: Yiieh of thase sentencizs is written comecily?
. Harare i the capital ¢ity of IiImbabwe.
4 Harare, is the Capiral, city, of Zimbabwe
C. Harare ls the capital ity of Zimbabwe?
D. harare is the: capital city ef zimbabwe.

| English Paper 2 Time: Thou 45 minutes

Read this poem and answer the questions below.
| Shapeless ard golourless



--- Page 109 ---
"Takes the shape and colour

Offtscortainer,
But, what @ wonderful substance

| Water is!

without water,

There 5 ne lite.

People drink it;

And do all their washing with
Animals drink it too

And some even fiver itil.

| [NO plants will grow

Without water.

Did you Khow?

Which con drive big engines.
1s gas water?

As hard as a stone

| |z.cnly solid water?

Yes. that ice in the fridge

Is only frozen water.

You can change water

Fram solid ia liquid to-gas.

Simply by heating it and adding more

But did you alsa know?
That the fire con boil the water
And yet the water

Can put cut the fire?

From the poem vou have read above, answer there questions

cenve thy.

1. Whats this poem talking about?
2, Besides having no colour, what else does water not have?
3. What would happen if there was ho water?

4 Besides rink ta how else do some arimgls use water?



--- Page 110 ---
5. Whotiewoler as a gos called?

4. How do people use steam?

7. Whatisice?

8. How canwater be cha nged from solid fo lguid and to steam?

7. How canwater be changed from liquid to solid?

10. Would you say-vwater Is net very useful, or Harmful, or véiy, very
vsetul? |

(if) Summary
In B12 Ines wiite a summary of the poem on water above. Write
your summary In full, complete sentences.
Begin by writing:
Water is'd very substance:

(fi) Composiion

imagine thal your family Ros moved te a new home which isin a
new drea-and negro differant’ school, You are now g gaing to:a new
school and you have a new class teacher.

Under the hedding My new school, wife a compasion about your
new school, the eachets and lean

Your compatition should bein 3-4 bara shs: in 10-15 lines.
Begin by writing:

Cur family moved too new home near o school called

That school is now my new }



--- Page 111 ---
UNIT h Keeping in fouch with ill people

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you how people keep in touch.

Keeping in touch is fo be communicating. with ofe another. People

can kesp in touch by:

+ wrifing letters

= lelephone (using Txed phones or mobile/cel phones

« sanding short messages using the cell photias/iioblle phones

« sendingmesagesfhroughthe e- rial: esysiemolanding messages
from one computer to another computer

- visiting them that is, travelling on foot, by cor, train; Qin ond seq.

Asking andc answering guesiions
Use the distances ghd on Ihe next page to ask eachother and to tel
the distances between some places in Zimbabwe,
Ask: How foris it flom to 7

What is fhe distarice between __

and %

How to use the grid

For example, the distance from Beitbiidge 10 Harare iswhete the ne
starfing with Beilbridge on top meets the fine starting with Harare from
the right. The distance is kim.

The distance fom: Chinhaoyi to futare & where the line starting wiih
Chinroyi on fap meets the line starting with Mutare from the fight. The
distances is.378km.



--- Page 112 ---
All disternces are in kilometers,

Read the dialogue below in threes thus the narator, Alec and Jacob.

| B Jacob BN

stationery  clossmates  arm-sling injury serous |
pioven! pleasure wonderful scipnoe receiving
computer e-mail stationary vehicles ricstsile

Cseattenng: plaster

Narrator: Jacob was abserit from school, He-sent a short message
to his teaches vsing g gel phone or mobile phone. A cell phone is
called g mobile phone because itis not fixed to one place and one
can move around with if. This is fhe shoft message that Jacob sent to

his teacher:

si I'm iy sory that | can’ it come to school. [fell fiom the back of al
MOYing: motorcar and broke my arm. am in hespital,

The teacher told Jacob's ends ond: classmates: why Jacob: was
absent frare, schodl. They were dll very sorry for Jacob. After school
that day, one of the friends phoned Jacob enthe mobile.



--- Page 113 ---
Alec:
Jaceah:

iccob:

Hello Jacak! II's me, Alec, your fiend. How are you?

Helio Alec! It's good that you phoned. | am nal in pain anymerne.
fy arm is in plaster and 1 wear an armssling. An carm-sling ka
piece of lath that hangs d round the neck holding the mjured
arm. It controls the free movemenl of the injured armiin order
to prevent pain of further injury,

Onl So IhisTnjury was quite serious? Just how did it happen? Bid
someone push you out from the back of the moving car?

Nol Nal Nol | was riding of the back oT this car thal was canying
boxes full of stationery. One of the boxes fall off, scattering
exercise books and other writing matenals on the: aoc, Then
the car slowed down inorder ta stop. | then Jumped eut thinking
that the car hod stopped. Thatls when | fell Badly and broke my

arm. The driver af the ear wis very samy forme, bul he was also
VERY Cross thest | jurnpad out of a moving car. That has taught
me a good lesson not to jump out of moving vehicles. Mex)
time, Pwill wait until thie vehicle is stationary.

Alec:

Joecob:

lal] sel |eam recllly sory for you Jacob. You will get wall soon
and came back to pity your favourite game of football,

I'm riot dt all woried about the football. I'm really worried

about missing s¢hool; and you my fends.

ry EE a ee ie


--- Page 114 ---
Ale:

Jacob:

Alec;

lacab:

Alec:

Jacob:

Dan't worry, Jacobl We will visit you during the weekend.
Meanwhile, | will send you: everything that we learned in
Mathemictles: Science ond English. ) will seid these by e-mail,
We learned lo send messages by e-tia dit school today. E-mall
is a way of sending messages from one computer fo another.

os

Ohl That's wonderful, Alec! You're such a wonderful fliehd!

EY

You're a very good Tend of many people, Jdcobl You're
always regdy to help others! Now ii i our ith tes halp vou also.

Ohl Thank you, Alec for those very kind words, | [giok forward fo
receiving the lessons by e-mall.

I's a pleasure doing this Tor you, JER, Get well soon, my
friend. We: all miss you atichool. Good-bye

Thanks a lof, Alec. Byel

i | we was Jacob absent from school?
2, ‘Where was Jocoh when He sent o short message

to his teacher?

How was Jacob injured?

What i§ an arm-siing?

Wher is it safe to jump out of a vehicle?
what game does Jacob play at sehicol?
What is an e-mail?

2,
4. Why is a calphone-also called omoeblle phone?
&
Fi
8

shen carefully ats your teacher fells you the good manners for people

using cellphones.

»  LUsathe eplotions fer good things only, not for the bad things lke
taking bad pictures:



--- Page 115 ---
«Always say your name first 10 the person you are speaking with on
the phone.

= Do not speak an the celphotie while eating, drinking or chewing
something.

+ Spegk clearly: do nol turn your mouth away from the phane:or
shoul,

= Your mouth should not touch the celiphbne mouthpiece when
you spedk,

~ Give The oinegr paison g chance speck also, do not speak on
and on without [istenng.

Be polite, do not use-bad longuage on the phore.

+ Switch off your phone during maelings, of funerals, in church, ©r
during prayer,

+ Dx not switch off the phone while the other person is still speaking

«Keep your talking short: it costs fime-and money.

«Always say 'goed-bye" at thes,

Sending short messages

Imagine that you are absent from school, $end a short message fo your
teacher telling hirm/har why you are absent from school, Remember fo
be polite in your short message. See Jacob's message tis dn example.

( # Read and speak rn

The long e sound

Say he sonlences below coitecily,

Nota that the bold words hove alohg o sound.
1. Jocobtel down and broke his arm;

Z. Themod mon tore the clothes he wore.

The 'miigic &" makes he vowsl.o before Tt sng and sey fis name, The
© Gsient.



--- Page 116 ---
Frc] His peosage comes Hy

Home alonel |
Lest Friday. | was albne at home. &
My parents had gone to the store §
to buy new clothes. When my Jj:
parents were away, a huge fire
started on the: slope close to.our |§
home. Thick: smoke rose frern the §
fire and filed my nose: 1 sat alone
or a big stone and ‘watched he
fire. | just hoped that the fire weuld
be put out before. it destroyad the
whole place,

| % Read and write E |

Verbs
Some vers that end with -e-add od inthe past tense,
Examples: spve - stved die — died divide — divided

Melusi wrote about a visit he made in his. diary. He wrote it all in the
present tense.

Parlene] The! you are Melusi now repoding [lelling olhers) everylhing in
the past lense by adding -d ho all the underlined viortis:

A visit to my relatives
One day | decide’ tp visit my EME pr
relatives who live just across the
big river. |'eycle in tha morning. |
like fo travel In the cool morning
‘wedther. | hope tofind my relatives ;
al al home. | complete my jourhey

well before. mid-morning: | always:
hote revelling in the hot afterngen



--- Page 117 ---
| “JL Wiite: Extra mile |
A Using the words stationery and stationary,

| Ficirh the siory A boy called Jacob, read the paragraph where Jocob
speaks for the second time, beginning with: Nol Nal Nel

The two words stationery and stationary are used in that paragraph,
Although the two words have the same sewnd, they have different
spelling a i meanings.

From that paragraph, complete these sentences,

1. The word stafionary means
A noving
B. sharing ta move
C. jumpitg out
3, hot foving

2. Theword stalionery means
A. falling off o moving car
B. books pensand other w MT
C. with a broken arm

Rowtine the following sentences filling in stafianery or stationary.
1. Itisonlysofe to get onto, or off the bus when the busis__

1
—_—

rig. materials

|
_— ee

2. Weusa lots of in Gur slasses,
3. itl hot safe to get onta or off the bus beforeitis :
4. The lomy is Mien it hes stopped.

|» Read and speak

The long o sound
The: © ¢lse has a long sound and thea Ts silent in words: ke: rowd, loaf
ond soap:

Read these sentences conectly.
1. From Ihe rood we could sée a boat sailing close to the coast.
2. Mother wen! lo the store and bought some sats, a piece of soap,

and olpafafbread. CL
3. We killed one of the.goafs fiat were roaming nearby and roasted’
tha maat,



--- Page 118 ---
Read the following poem. Reche W.

Take time to listen!

Of THe folr communication skills:

Listening, speaking. reading and writing,

Listening Is by far the mos! impeniant fo me;

Because T weadl really listened carefully

We would net make some of the mistakes that we make
Or repeat other people's mistakes,

If the.children istered 1o their parents,

And the parents listened tether children;

If the people listened to their leaders,

And the lgaclers listeried ta their people;

There would be peace; nat war

Peace in the family, peace in the home, peace in the country,
All because wa all llstened to ane anolher,



--- Page 119 ---
Chief Gono was very famous: and popular, He always listened ko his
‘Rivers Region.

sald to Tembo; “Go and tall alt the Vilage heads that there Tsgging to

From Hye poem above answer these guesiions,
1. Which one the four communication skills?
2. Explain which of the four communication skills is the most impaertéant
to you?
3. Do leurfiers always listen to their teachers?
Notas is ding to this poem, wity do we make 50 any. mistelkes In life?
E. What d » you enigy.deing more: listering while ofher people Talk or
talking while other people listen? Why?

Retelling news
Listen ta the news onthe radio of television, Afterwards, tell your friends
the news you hove heard,

Read this starry and GnsWET the qu esfions thet follow.
Chief Gono and his messenger, Tembo

‘problems trusted messenger cislyt i
region shepherd hyenas knelt

surptised dismissed apologized keen

popular

people's problems. ond worked hard fo solve them, The chigf ruled
over three regions: the: Mountain Region. the Forest Region and the.

One: day Chief Gono called Tembo, his trusted mess

singer, The chief

be avery big:and important meeting. The village heads must send all
Heir people, young and old, to this meeting. | would like the people to
big all thelr money protierfs to this meeting."



--- Page 120 ---
Tembio was now tna ald fo go te all the regions and her viliges. He
called his three sons Jim, Pote:and Ndoro and told tem the chief's
rnessage, While Tambo was tdlking, the three sors wears thin king of their
awn Jobs, Jimu, a shepherd, was thinking of how 1o proteat his fiock
of sheep Fam Ihe hyenas, Pots: a former wos worried aboot the [tite
rains. Nelo, 4 fisherman, wes keen 10 go out fishing,

Tembo crdered his sor fo goo the reglens. with the chief's message.
dirau wstit Io thie Mountain Region, Pate to fhe Forest Eegion and Ndom
to ihé Rivers Region.

dir mist thes villas heads ane saicl fo Lhe, “send only the ald people
to the meeting.” Pale met all the villigens and said to them; “Send only
a messenger with your money problems fo the mesting.” Ndoro also
met all the villagers and said te them, “Send only:sems monsy [ihe
meefing." |

The day of the mgefing carved, but anly a tow old people came. This
surprised the chief. He usked Tembao to explain whal had happeried.
Tembo knell down and apologized. The chief disrriiiees] Wim From his
post as the-chief's messenger,

Far — a mip E Cah. Roe FT —
a ee Se Ry oy Ee ——



--- Page 121 ---
from the story you have read cbove, dnswer these questions comectly.

1. WhatwasTermbo's job?

2. What was Mdore's job?

3. Which ene of tHe three sors was o fofmer?

4. Why was Chief Gono famous and ponuiar

5. Why did Tembo fail to foka the chief's message to the: regions and
the villages himself?

6. OFthe three sons in the story, who was ashephierd?

7. From. which region were ihe féw old people who come to the
chief's meeting?

8 Why was Tembo dismissed from his post as the chief's messenger?

9. What does this story teach uste do when someone is speaking fo
us?

~~ speak and write Il}

Jobs and eccupations

In the: story you read Tembo's sons were thinking about thelr Jobs: Jirnu,
a shepherd, Pole, o feirrvier and Hdaoro, a flskemhan:
In your groups talk about what each of the sons did.

Choose the comect word from the box to complete the sentences

below,
‘driver sculptor basket weaver chef
| doctor tire tighter pottet vendor

1. Ms Shumbo drives a fire engine and fights fire. She is ©

2. When Sipho grows yp she wants fo work in a hospital treating sick
people. She wil bea

3. Thabani's unclemakes things ke clay pots and flower vases: out of
clay. Heisa

4. Grandfather Mhukahutu i's
Helsa

5. Nomakhosi sells vegetables and fruits at the market, She is a

ces nice baskets using reads and shaw.



--- Page 122 ---
& My sister makes things from stone. She isa

7. She tok! me her brother moves moter vehicles. He is a

8. my friend wants fo work in a hotel # preparing food when he grows
wp, He wontstobe a

The simple present ro—

i Look of the tabie below and read the sentences across the table.
Begin your sentence with any of these:

tvaryday  fEvervlima | orbBeery weak/month/year _

Verb of doing werd

Ho ,-She, If. Mother,
Paul, Mary; The: child;
Theigl

Note: -5 is added to the: verb when you are saying what hesshefit

or nome of g single person gr thing does everyday/everylime/every

weakiavery month/avery yeareic.

(ii) Following the example in the lable above, make your own short
sonfiuc es with these verbs,

rece buy Toe hear Cook aby

iil) Read his shor! paragraph on what fativer dogs dvisyday,

Every moming father washes himself and :

brushes his teeth. He dresses up to go'te | |
| es on foot. He crosses the

ne catcgz obs eater nines. He does ao
lot of good werk for the people. He kisses [i
ws on his return from werk.



--- Page 123 ---
Note: we add -es ko thee verbs that end willy-ch, x, -55, sh ds well.as’

the verbs go and do in the simple present tense with: hefshefi thor name:

of one:person or thing.

(iv) Rewrite these sentences coroctly by ackding -5 of -o5 tothe verbs
in brackets:
Allorweandds, read the seafene of vou have wiitlen Yo the class,

1. Every evening, Teridai (watch) television or (do) her hamewaork,

Z Everyday the old man (relax) in his cHetir or (polish) his shoes.

3. Our rood (branch) fram the main oad that (poss) through the:
farms:

4. Mother (mix) milk, and flour ther (wash) the pots after cooking,

5. ‘Whenever she (finish) her work, she (watch) talevision,

Writing a summeiry

When we wile a summary;

« we write only the most important points or infermatien and leave:
out the details

* We con Use our iawn words 16 make g shorter story.

Read again the story of Chief Gono and his messenger, Jembo,

Afterwards, write the sumiriary of that story below using the rdaht wards,

from the brockets:

Chief Gono and his messenger, Temkg,
Chief Gonowas {lkeid/rol liked] by his people becouse he [cared/did
net care) about-them. |

Ona cay the chief sent Tembo {one of his sons/his messenger) fo
call dll the people to a big (feast/meefing). The (meetingffeast] was
{hot important/very mipartant) io [a few people/all the pecple). The
messenger was too (lazy/old) togo round dll the villages.

He:sent hisown [oid people/sons) fo goand call the people to thechief's
meeting. The [old peoplefsons) were (listening carefully/not listening)
os ther {chiefAather) was speaking to them. So the [ald peapie/sons)
went out and gave {comectwrona) messages to the villagers.



--- Page 124 ---
On the cory oof thes roesetingg [many pecpte/anly o few old people) tumed
wp, This really [sotishiad/surpizad) the chigh The chief oskad (the sory
bis messenger] what had happened, The (zonfmgssenger) wos very
(pleasad/somy} for what herd happened. The chief was [very happy
not pleased at all). He (fired/thanked) the messenger.

ris

The lomg sound of tha lofla u 2s in use, cube, abuse, June ond clue.
The ‘magic «' mekes fie vowel u before if long and say ts name. The
ex itself is silent.

Ui) Redd! he seestange Dedow coltec Dy wich ine HIE, ob yor lec her.

0m Tuesday | Foe to excuse mysall from the music lesson. Theat did fot
armuse me at all because | like the music lessons, | had to excuse myself
die to a sickness that | wos sire my doctor was going to cure. At the
school gate, | rafused 10 join the queue of people boording ther bus.
[nistesesed, [wotlkid édovwn fhe avenue, Thee | sow a budge statue of o
pricart figding < mle, Lwias armiséd when a mann drmy yniform made a
sollte af the huge statue,



--- Page 125 ---
& tizten and speak =)

Your teacher will ancnge hal you listen io the mews onthe radio or
lebeyision, Listen cazefully and temember the nows

Tell the class or the teacher one riews item that you heard wher you
| Istened fo the news on the radio ar felevision,
 Sedy it like thiss

| heard on the news that

| In pais. pretend that it is after school and you we visiling « friend
who was absenl from school on that day. Talk to each other far abou)
on minute

Read fis passage correctly and fluently.
The dairy farmer

A dairy farmer had ten cows that gove hin a lot of milk for sale, The
farmer thought the ten cows were 100 few and that the milk he got
friar therm was 160 little. The farmer baught ten mare cows and that
increcsed. {hie milk fer sie. Mary people thought the farmer now
| had too many .cows and that the milk they were: producing was top
much from one farmer. The farmer sil thought his dairy cows were
too few and that the milk they produced wis 106 litle. So he started
looking for more dairy cows.

1. The passage above shows that
A. people do not like dairy cows
‘B. people dislike dairy farmers
Cc. there gre very féw daly farmers around
BD. some people raver 2 Stop. looking for mere wealth



--- Page 126 ---
2 While the farmer thought that he got too little: milk from his too:

few cows, the people thought that the fanher .
A. had enough cows that gave Rim enough milk
B.. was Mow. & geting less milk from his momy cows
C. nowt toa: many cows that were giving him too much milk
By. still needed mors cows to produce more milk’

3. After the former bought ten more dain cows, he thenfad
A. fen cows
B. eleven cows
C. twenty cows
Dn, hoo rary cows

4. In history of Ihe dairy farmer above, the word “foe! means.
A. just encugh
BE. more than; or less than wos necessary or aceepltable
C. less than two
D. bw

5 To'inGredse’ means fo
A. become less in nukes or amount
B. be just enough for what is needed
C. become more In nvmberor amount
D. get hothing ot ull

Rewrite the following paragraph changing the verbs in the brackets
= into the present tense for things that do not change, and
+ into the past terse tor the things that happened ond passed.

| Avis to my friend's house

Yasterckay | (visit) my fiend who (Ivel across the river: She (cook very
deliciausfood forme: My fiend {do) the cooking tor herself everyday.
Alter egfing, my fiend and | {fai} about our schaalverk. We also
(watah) television and (play) games. Then | (walk) heme. arid (pes)
thiciugh the bushes. | {omive) back home when it [is] already dork

mn the evening. My parents were: not (please) with thal. in fadl, my
tather {want} to punish me but my mother (ask) him fo forgive. me.
Then | [promise] miy parents: that will always travel during glerpiginit,



--- Page 127 ---
© Listen and speak |

Sporis legends are P— or well-known people who have done
something that meny people admire in sports. Your teacher will 1ell vou
oul a spocls legend, Listen carefully.

Answerit the fellowing questions from what the teacher has fold you.

1. Whal ls the name of the sports legend the teacher hos told vou
about?

ls The person male or female?

Where does the person come rom?

The pérscrnis Farms for which sport?

what are some of the outstanding achievements of that parsan in
that fleict?

wb

Read the following pussege and answer fhe questions tal follow.

Sports legends
Megends stadiums spectators twice
| unded produced waich fwoughout
Argentina Foreigre: admired boxes

\ aware

All aver the worlg o today, there are tary: — sarning a lotof money
through sparts. Same of these people have become legends thraugh
sport. A person becomes d legend when he ar she Ts famous or well

known far daing something thats admired by many people.

Muhammad All, a bletk American, one of the ward's sports legends.
He Is. knicvwn os the greatest boxerof all ime. The Wiliams sisters, Venus



--- Page 128 ---
ard Serena, hove aba bocome legends in fennis. A man called
Usciin Bolts. alse a legend for clocking |ust under ten secor
one-hundred metres race; This means 1n that race, Bolt was.running
ata speed of about thirhesi Klemetres per hour In Zimbabwe. Kirsty
Gaventry is © swimming legend,

Socuen or football iE ane of the most popular sports In Zimbabwe.
It is also. a very. papular spert throughout the word, Thousands of
spectator go fo stadiums towatchsoccer teams play. Soccer salsa
krigiem as ihe most Beoutiful garnie”. Soccor ngs itsown legends. Pele
of Brazil, Ronald of Portugal and Mess) of Argentina are some of fiw
sono legends in thes sold,

Over [He YEO, Ombabwe football hos produced its own soccer
legends. One such legend is George Shaya. He won the Soccer Star
of fhe Year awvord five fires.

Orily two other players have wan the Socear Star of the Yea wiih
hwice: These were Stanlay Ndunduma ane Peter Ndlovu, To dale,
there hos been anty one toreignern, Jesoph Eomwonde, o Malawian
wha won the Socoer Stor of the Year award in Zimbabwe. He was
playing for Cops United. Peter Ndlovu wis the first African seecer
plover to ploy In fhe mew English Prefiier League.



--- Page 129 ---
Answer these ET—— comecily.

1.

what & the other name for football?

When is a person nalled a legend?

Who is known 2s the boxing legend of all time?

For which sport are Ihe williams sisters Venus and Serena known?
Whatde we coll people watching sports or grams?

How any Times did George Shaya win the Soccer Star of the Year
orward?
Who Is the only foreigner to win Zimbobwe's Soeeer Star of the
aor ewaey

Your teacher will make arrangements for you to listen lo a radio football
commentary. Afterwards, tell the class the highlights or the mos!
important points of the match.

Begin lke this;

One of the Mighlights. of the: game/match was when

ese gueshons from the foolball commentary that you listened

Which teams were playing?

Where was this match played?

whith tetrmwas (of) the home team? {t3] the away or visiting team?
Da you think there ware many, or just a few spectators watching
this gome? Why?

Can you name some of the players whe were in this match and
brs tears.

Who sored werafs for gach team?

What was the score line {a) al half time? (6) ar ihe end of the
game?

Which team won the-matc h?



--- Page 130 ---
oi
os!

ec

2 BS

Hie

Wilting © composition using verbs In the past tense
Ki gi wrote the composition: A day in the rain. Its in the present terse.

Rewrite the composition in the past lense by replacing the verbs in the
present tense (in brackets) with the conc past tense.

Adayintherain = | |
I {wake) up carly and (go) to the market. If (ig) in the eady maming.
There | (see) many people who (come) from different places. They

(speak) in different languages. | (say) nothing fo them, They fee (do)
not speck te me:

[ (get) filed and (sit) on one of the brick stools. | (am) alse very hungry: |
thave) a few coins in my pocket | (buy) en orange and a banana that
teat) quickly. | also (drink) some waler That the market Women (give)
me, The women (me) very kind 10 me.

THen | {forget) my Umbrella there. | (fake) the short route back home,

Then it (begins) to rain. | (hear) thunder. | {tun} along. Ther | (fall) down

and (break) my finger. | (feel) a lot of pain which | {ean) not stop. Then
| (think) and (remember) what the teachers (leach) us in First Aid.

I {make} « bardage with my fie and put il round ry broken finger,
Then | (meet) mother onthe rogd, She (is) filled with ters of hgppiness
when she (sees) me alive. We {go) home together. Father (sees) us
walking logether: He (comes) out ta meet us, He (does) not scold me.
Instead he (forgives) me for geing out in the rain. He (tells) me not tor
do that again, oo

Dictionary work

Arranging words Hal Begin with the same letter i aiphobstical order,



--- Page 131 ---
« Iftnere are two orimore words that begin with the some letler fer
example piece. paoce you compare their second laters,

»  Ifthere ars twecrmere werds which have the sama fist and second
lesttiays, for example, heat, head, heal you compare the third letters
and so en.

Write the following words in alphabefical orden
| prize prize juice

justice dawn price

Spang ie and dictation
Your teacher will. call out 19-15 words and © paragraph from Sports
legends while you write them.

~~ speak and write JE

Research
Find out abouf any sperfs legend in Zimbabwe. Read magazines,

newspapers, bisoks, surf the internat, listen to news on radio andon the

[ree

television; Make some notes obiout that person. In your notes answer
the questions elow:.

1. Whot I the nome of the sports: legend the teachar has tald you
Is the person mize Or female?

where does the person come fram?

The person is famous for which sport?

Whintt ara some of the oulstanding achievements of that person in
thot field?

Present what you have researched an to the class. You. can show the
class some pictures. Afterwards, write what you have presented in 3-4



--- Page 132 ---
or

ers

DP Listen and speak

listen carefully as the teacher reads to you the story of The Good
samaritan from the Bible mn the Book of luke, Chagler 10 verses 25-37.

) Answer these questions from the story the teacher read for you.
ris 1. Who fold iis story? |

2, ‘whl is the story-of The Good Jamgritan gll about?

3. Wriat do we leam from the story of fhe Good Samaritan?

#7 Read and speak -
= Read the poem and recite it to the class.

Be a Good Samaritan
If you see
Someana who needs your help:
Do not tum away.
| Stretch your hand,
| Give ven he little you can give; |

Th] i
Say seme: words of love

And smile!
Alwerys be there
To bring joy to others!



--- Page 133 ---
Read tis story ead answer the quesfions that follow.

Jere ond Modam Nkoma
Jere iverd alone ina strong stone hut. He did not welgnme visitors to his
hut. The nearest hut to Jere's heme belonged te Madam Nkema. She
wigs tr widow whose husbd nd hae died inthe war. Modam Nema kept
¢ sgl donkey. Whenever Madar? Nkomawanted fo tiovel ground the
small donkey camesd her on. ils back. One day Madam Nkama could
not find her small donkey. She asked the people in the viloge but ho
one had sean the donkey. Lastly, the want fo Jere's ut to ask him alsa,

Jere said fo her, “Why do you keep that useless donkey? | hope thot if
dies nit comeback.”

Meio Moma returned to her hot, crving, When she got to her hut
tia donkey hod coma back, She wis vary. very Diese A

Aweek ater, a very strong wind pulled dow ithe big res close to Jere's hut.
The big ree fell on the door of Jare’s hut while he was adeep inside. Jere
could net open thes door from inside. He called for hein if a very loud voice.



--- Page 134 ---
Modem NKkoma tok a strong rope and hurried fo Jere’s hut. She tied
nang end of the rope raund her donkey's back. Then, she tied the other
end of the rope to the branches of the fallen free. After that she. and

the {HO

key pulled and pulled and pulled. Finally, Madam Nkomd

and her small donkey munaged to mmeve thie free rom Jere! sor.
Then Jere was able to apen the door antd come outside, Jere said to
Madam Nkoma, “Today you have taught me a big lesson. Thank you
very much”

Choase fhe connect answers for the follow ing Guesiions,

which statements true about Jems hut?
A. '|Yweas:a bck hut.

B. [bwosvary weak:

CC. lhwasd strong brick Ruf.

B ItFwas Bult of stone.

What pulled down the tree near Jers hut?
AL A strong wind,

‘Bi The:smiall donkey.
€. Madam Nkorna..

D. ‘We co not know. |
Whotdo you think was the fasson that Madam Nkomataught-Jere?

‘A. That strong winds can pull down frees.

B. Ta help othefs whe they aren need fear help.

C. To keap a donkeys pulling away fallen trees.

D. Nol te live alone,

Why wos Madam Nkoma very pleased wher she returned to her
hut from Jere's hut?

A. SH had managed to talk fo Jere.

B. Jere had given herthe help: she hod ax

‘C. Her lost donkey had come. back.

D. She liked to talk to the: ceople in the village:
This story has a. ending,
A. sad IB. hightening C. happy D. cruel



--- Page 135 ---
using bait.

BRN =

Using but
Look at these two sentences:
She bought a new car but cannot drive.

Note: we use but to join two states 3S’ when the second statement

i different from the: first steitement, or Seems surprising after the: first
statement. |

Choose the suiiable ending from ie box fo complete these stalemeni.
Today Mifiro is not feeling wellbut ___
want to go lo fowmbut __ .

That mary 16 blind but_

wes ate Tor whoo! this orming but ER
He is the shortest bay in the class but

EE

he Gi Ihe fe festess runner
{was nat purished |
| do not hava bys fare
he walks around townawithout any difficulty. |

—————

Using although
We can ako vse the word although in place of but.

Look at this two examples:

[ Today Ben's not ot fesling Jing wall bast hes is aking port Inv sporls. |
| Today Ben is nof fasting well although he ls taking part in: sports. |
i

Complele the senfences In Write above replacing but with although,



--- Page 136 ---
=, =.

A composifion
In: 3-4 paragraphs: in 12-15 lines wiite composiflon about two people:
A and B. Give them real saniniss of your choice itV which:
«A goestoB to ask for JER. bust
- B doesnotgive helpto A
After some time. B.gets help fram. A.
Give your story @ good heclig

'D) Usten and speak

The sounds of ie in diferent words,

Say this sentence carfeclly aiier your teacher:

The people cried when they heard that he had died.

ij inthe words.ched and died the ie says al
The ie in the following words has the same sourd-as in cried and
died. Say the words correctly:

fied raslied died fied lied denied supplied fried applied

fil Inihewordchief the le hosalongl saurid,
The ie in thi following words has the some jong i sound as in the
word chiel. Say fhe words caredtly:

field niece piece shield hoBbies bables believe raliles woes

Exception:in the word friend the ie has ashort @ sound and thei is silent.
Spelling and dictation
Listen carsfully os your teQcher calls out some waits and one paragroph

from fhe story of Jere and Madam Nkorma | while you write them,



--- Page 137 ---
Revision and assessment 11

| 9) Listen and speak = >

Look, listen and soy the poem below, line by fine afer your teaches

were Bom byathers,

When you were shill young,

You wera bathed ond fed by others,

Even the name that you now: SQV 15 yours,

Was given fo you bathers.

The car, the bus, or the train thal you fravel on,
Was made: and is driven. by. others.

The school In which you are learning.

And the house in which you seep

Were: ols by cthars.

The Gangs that you love 1o play

Were skarled by others.

The: big question fo you I€

What are you doing forothers?

| Carefully read the poem Thank others aloud.

Make your own sentence:
1. using but
2. beginning with Although



--- Page 138 ---
| Rewrite the following paragraph in the past lense of the words In the
| brackets.
We did if ourselves!
When the rain [come] we (dig) heles and (grow) potatoes: Althoughit
fis) nel edsy, we [do all the work ourselves. Sometimes we [woke] up
very early to do-the work. We {see) the green potate p plarits growing
wel and we [kriow) that we were going to get o good Harvest, Al the
Lend of theseasonwe indeed (get): bumper harvest, We (give) soma
of the pg potatoes lo the arphanage, We [are] sure thal the orphans
there liked potatoes. We [stand] there as the crphidng (sing) with joy
| and speak): fo us‘thankfully. Then we [sell] the rest of the potatoes
and (make) a'let of money.



--- Page 139 ---
Read this passage and answes the questions that follow.
A spoiled day

pollufion damaging shocked Tooling suddenty
| unsuitable urine sewage raw: spol
| disappointed  pRisOnOUS

Mr Gutu was driving his family to the dam. The sun was bright and the
weather was fine. This made It o goad day for fishing. On the way,
they came across a big veld fire. Suddenly, everyones Inthe carwas
coughing,

Tato: asked. "What made us al cough like that, father?" Mr.Guty
answered. "We breathed In péluted air that made us cough like
tat. Air pollution is very harmful.”

Kuda asked, “Whi is dir pollution, father?" rr Gut explained, "i
i the damaging of the ait, making it Unsafe. When you see people
blaring C0ss or che hres Yau mgt knw that they are causing air
poliution.”

Then they tifived dt frie dam anc locked of the water. Tney were

shocked. The water in the dam had a greenish colour. There wera

some dead fish floating in that water.



--- Page 140 ---
“Father, why Is ibe water greenish in colour?" asked Tarra, "What has.
kllead those fish floaiing i in he water?" Kuda also caked.

Nr Guty answered, "Water pollution haseaused ell that. Water potion
is caused by people throwing olls, wing, raw sewage, and food left
overs in the water It is alo croused by people who throw plastic bottles,
empty tincans, pisces of wend ar metal: and other pieces of dirfm the:
water, The'sarne things thal pellute thewater also pollute the lo ric] and
the soll, making therm unsafe and Unsbitable for use.

Then kirs Gutu added, "The polluted water hos become dangerous or
poisonous to the fish. We should not catch any fish from this polluted
witter. If we: eal the fish form he polluted water, the poison In them
could also kill us."

"Yes, children.” thelr father agreed with mother, "We canno! do any
fishing. iry this polluted water. Sa we mush go back hme without ony
fish. Pollution has spoiled our day. Pollution can spall our ives foo."

Tarifo and Kuda were very disappointed.



--- Page 141 ---
Choose the correc answer.

What made it'd fine day for fishing?

A. The many fish in thes dam.

B. The drive to the.dam in father's Gar.

C. Il wasnot a schigol day.

D, Thesun wis bight and The weather was fine:
2. Whats. pollution?

A. the damaging of thé air water, ar land midgking Furisafe and

unsuitable for use

‘B. caused by buming grass and old tyres

C. anly dangerous to he fish hart ve in the water

3. damaging of the air or the sail arly. making both bnsafe-and

unsuitable foruse

3. What shocked them at the: dam?

A. The coughing.

B. The dead fish they saw inthe wotet,

C. The woter that was: greemish | in olor,

0. Both the colourof the water and the dead fish in that water,
4. This story shows that poliution is. caused by

A. thesgil

B. the water

C. the people

D. the air oo
5. Whal disappointed Torre end Kuda atthe end of the story?
A, The dead Shin the waler,
B. Their parents.
C. Returning home: without doing any fishing.
D. The fingweather

Resear §]

Go ond find out abou! oir, land and water pollution. Redd: books,

Phan nevispapers and sur the intemet if you have access. You

can ak other poping Collect pictures that shiow aii, land ond water
pollution. If vow can, take some p Pret

ophs showing: polluticn. Write



--- Page 142 ---
be = Aa

u paragraph each far ar, land and water pollution, Present what you
have written to thie clos: Make your presération very interesting. Tell
the cloiss:

»  whatalr poliution & and what causes it

» what woler pollution is and what causes it

= What land or stil pollution is and what caysesit,

E wiite

Using un-
Look at these sentences in tha box:

| fig nproieciad wols.

Completes this senlence wilh the righ! ending,
The un- in the wards Uriate, unsuitable, ond unprotected means

Rewrite each sentence cdding vn- fo fhe words in bald to mean exactly

the opposite:

1. Takyreis willing to play. with me.

2. The teacher was happy with our work.

3. The lomy came and the workers loaded the Bogs of cotton,
4. am able todivie g car.

5 The man «as king ta other people;

&: Some sports that people play ore: popular.

7. Here are he keys, please iock fhe door.

8. know that she is selfizh,

9. Polluted water is fif far washing:

10. The new teacher was known in this area.

11. Sere people are grateful when yeu help therm.
12. Qurinew neighbour is derdly,

Using while and the -ing Yeti of the doing word
Look at these two sentences:
MriGaty was driving while talking to his children. for),



--- Page 143 ---
White Mr Gulu was driving. hie was talking 10 his children,

Tris resins that Mr Gulu wes doing two things at the some time.
~an yo nome thie twio things hal Mr Guty was doing at the same
Complete these seniences comely:

1. The Doyswere playing football while _
2. | was doing my pomeworkwhile:
3. While mother was cooking:

the doing word.

fences of your Gwn Using while and the: ing form of

PD Listen and speak

The shorl e sound of ea ] Co
Listen carelully and say this senfence correctly afies your teacher.
The schoo! hed seid thot the weather will be fine

In fhe words head and weattiet. the aa sound [ike the short « and the
e ig silent

say these words comectly. The eq intham sound ke the en in woaiher.

_—

(feittior wealth breod instead pleasant death heal
feather wed re ro read basin Measure leather

Writing c letter fo a fiend

Imagine you were Tarre or Kuda in the siory A spo ih day. You had
staffed witling a letter to-a friend, but did not finish it. wiite: hi letter
in full by completing the paragraphs and the ending. Write your own
address.



--- Page 144 ---
338

Your adress

_ —
| Father “explained vo us that ur goughing, was caused by breathing

Whit we saw. ut the darn shocked us. “The

(eriding of your letrer)

Spelling and diciaiion
Your teacher will cdll ut seme wards ond one: paragraph from A spoiled
day while you write them.

= Speak ond wriie E )

Using -tul fo form adjectives
Say this sentence toyour fiend:
Polluted water ls:harmful to pesple and animals.
We Hove added -iul to the word harm fo make the new word harmful,
Note the speling at the end of the word haimiul.

say these sentences comectly by adding. -ful 16 the words in brackets.
1. The (care) bus driver aveided the aceident.



--- Page 145 ---
*D Re

The sick child looked very {sorow].

The trees in our arehard are very [fit],
The headache can be very (pain).

The people at the wedding were all (joy).

Complete the sentences below cormscily.
The Yictoria Falls are a (wonder) place.

The honest girl Is alweys [ruth],

The new teacher is very (cheer).

The minbow is very [Beauly]. (note: inbeauty: frst replace the v
with. 1)

The farmer Fids got § ower) actor to plough His fislds,



--- Page 146 ---
Ciciz] River. Another Hibudem
down stream, long after it has passed fhe Bichenough Bridge.

Read this passage and answer the guesfions that follow.

Imbabwe hos rrany Jandmarks spredd across the courifry. A
landmark [s a bullding, object or place thot you can easily recognise,

The Birchianough Bridge is dane of fimbobwe's landmarks,

BirchenoughiBridge issituatedinsoulhveast Zimbabwe acrossthe Save
River. The Save Rives has its source in Zimbisbwe gnd flows through

Mozambique to the Indidn Ocean. The Save River is Zimbabws's.

second largest river after the: mighty Zambead. The Zombez! forms:
the country's. Northern: border with Zambia. Before it passes the:
Bircheriough Bridge, the Save River is fed by 118 main Tibulary, Ihe
thie Runde River lows into the Save River

Brrehenough Bridge is an. the main highway Thal Inks the cities of
Musvindo ond Mutare. The bridge wias built by a nan called Dorman

Lang. twas completed. in 1935, The whole bridac is suspended, orls
hanging gn curved massive: stes)| frames. The curved metal frames
give if the grey rainbow shape that is visible ram a distance of ten
kilomshes. The Birchenough is the only bridge with no supporis on the

Bettom.



--- Page 147 ---
— " 2 :
: ee —— = SEE a ed -

The: bridge got Tts name from Sit Henry. Birchenough. He was the
chairman of the Beit Trust which paid for the building of the bridge.
The exhigs of Sit Hemry Birchenough anc his wile, Mabmal, cre buried
Lieneath the shiuciure of the bridge.

The structure of the Birchenough Bridge has often appeared on
Timbabwean coins, and postage stamps. This shows [hal the bridge
is indeed d landmark in the country.

Choose the cores! answer.
1. Whal k alandmark?
A. Astatde.
B. A huge building,
C. A building, objec) of place fheat wong Con easily recognise,
OD. A blg nver. :
2. ‘Whereis the Bichenough Bridge?
| A. In Mozombigue.
8. On the Save River in south-eait Zimbabwe.
{. On tha lambed Bivor,
0. On the Nother border with Zambhia,



--- Page 148 ---
A Avery Dig river.
B. A river that fiows iro hie aceon.
C. A river with a big bridge.
D. ‘A smaller river that flows into a Bigger river,
4 Who Built the Blrehenoughy Bridge?
A, Sir Henry Birchenaual,
E. ‘Aman called Dorman Long,
C. The Reserve Bank of Zimbabve.
D. The national hero, Jeshug Nkomo:
5, The Birchenough Bridge s named after
A, the tieit Tryst which paid forthe bullding: of the bridge
8. the man who was the chairman of the Feil Trust
C. the man called Dorman Lang
0 ore of the country's national heroes
6. Which matorists ate Tkely lo: Use the Birchenaough Bridge?
A. Motorists Travelling from Masvingo fo Mutare or Mutore: ta
MGS INGG.
B. Motorists fraveling across the northern Harder with Zambia.
C. Motarists fraveling from Zimbabwe fo the Indian ©cean.
Bb, Motorists reveling on Samora Machst Avenue In Harare.
7. The Runds River fiowsinta the Save River
A. at Birchenough Bridge:
Bg after tha Sava River has long passed the: Birchenough Bridge
C. long bisfore the Save River passes the:Birchenough Bridge
PB. atthe courty's northern border with Tambia
8 Whose ashes as buried berieath the Birchenough Bridge?
A. The ashes of Mabel, who was §ir Henry Birehgnough's wife:
B. The shes of ir Henry Bircheneugh and his wife, Mabel,
C. The ushes of Sir Henry Birchenough.
0. The ashes of g ron called Daman Lor
9. ‘What shows that the Birchenough Bick dge is inciesd a langmark Try
Ornbicbwe?
A. Vis modes of curved steel frames.
B. 1tfitks thie two cities of MUlate and KasYingo,
is framework appears on the country’s caging and postage
stamps.
il wiess completed | in the: Year 1935.

——",



--- Page 149 ---
(in nium bers 10:22 choose the correct form of the verb to filt in the

hilanks.

10. Laostweek my mother med pan present,
Age: Bogives CGC giving gave
11. Whenever the walar pips Breaks, my Sir I
| A, fig B. fixed  C. fixes D. fiking
12. We cannot do putlo play now because: itisstil -
A. in B.mining. C. rained  D. rains
13. Although he upinfown. he fiowiivesin the rural ateq,

A. grew Bog gow C. grows  D.growing
14. Everyday tmany cars fravel on the busy road thot
fhrouigh our village.
pass B. posses C. passing D. passed
15, be which word has the eter i a differént sound frofn the rest?
A. bicycle: B. right C. Sisculls D. cried
16. Inwhich ward has he letfara d different sound from Tha rest?

ee —

A, mistooke 8. hate C. hal 0: wait
17. In which word hos the alter © a differen sound from the |
pest?

A, Hor B.gogl C.wrote Dread
18. In'which werd has the jester u a different sound from he rest?
A. music B. refuse Co excuse DD. subject

In numbers 19-23 choose the correct word to fill in the blank spaces.

19. Another name for foplballis: _ .
A. sports B. game: C.soqcer 0: play

20. People watching agdame ike foctbdllare coed
A. speciators B. possengery C. PEC astricing D. audience

ZTE. When two things ari saidto be they do not lock olke.

A. gimilce  B. different C. same D. squal

22. When you are late fof school you | to the teocher.
A. promise B. ok C. apologise Dn explain
23. Maonychidrenget when they swallow hard objects

ke othe tops. | .
A. breatred  B. choked C. pierced 0. eopughed


--- Page 150 ---
Read this passage end answer he questions Hietfolow,

The water on earth i aways changing. Its repeating changes make
the water gyele. In fhe cycle, water can be a solid, The ice we see
when water freezes is ariually solid watel, When the ice is heated, il
mets into liquid woter that we use far drinking, | ~oaking and washing.
When rice heat ls added, the liquid water tums into walter vapour.
water vapeur is water thal has turned to gas.

We see watarin the dams, in the pools and In the rivers. There is also
waterin the plants and animals: All this water keeps changing from
0 gas; toa liquid, and to a:sofid. When heat Is subtracted from the |
gleam. ttl basomes liquid water. If more heat subtracted, the
liguich winter freeizas inte thie solid thet we know ag ice. |
In humboes 24-30 sleet the cotreot answer,

24. What is this passage taking about?
A. The importance of water.



--- Page 151 ---
B. Rain.
C. The walter cycle:
. What Is the name we give to solid water?
A. Cold alr 8. Steam C. ka BD. Weder vapour
5. What is anather nara tor water vapour?
A, Steam EB. Ice €. Ran D. Hefll-stones
7. Adding haat to quid water will changethe wearer info _____.
A Toe B. rainy C. asolid  D.waler vapour
In numibens 28-30 which wort means the seme as the phrase in bold”
28. When heot is added fo ice, Ihe ice changes into a liguled.
A. freeres B. melts C. evaporates 0, boil.
. When 'yau keep an subliccting heat from Nguld werter, The water
becomesa solid.
A. Hews B. freezes C. rain 0. evaporates.
. Meating the cold air i like taking away the:-heat from the water
WC,
“, adding EB. changing  C.subffocting D.evoporating

bers 31-34 choose the bes! worcds Jo fil In the Blank space

Polluted woter 1s far drinking.
A, clean B. licyuicd C. umsafe D. wrong
32. Someone wha i wellknown 1o, ond liked by many people i |

As ramets B. kind C. [mpertant  D. good
| 33. Of these people, the is or motorist

A, verdar  B. pedesifiagn  C. passenger D. driver

. Instead of closing oll the wirkdows, she __ therm all,

A, opened B. closed C. opering oy, shut
35. Which of these words comes first in the dicflonany?

A. match B. March C. marmthon D. market
3b. Which of hese sentences is wiitter correchy?

A. OH, what a wander goat?

. Ohl What a wonderful goal

=. Ohl What a wendertul goal?

>, Ohwhat a wonderful'goal



--- Page 152 ---
Read this —_—i— and answer the questions thal follow.

Good manness.
Gaod manners never get out of fashion like the clothes we pot on,
Legm tG say, “Excuse me." when you cough, sneeze of drop
something. Il is bad manners to. blow your rose of pick your ears
while people are having ameal, Always coVeryour maouth.and nose
wher you. cough or sneeze. Say. "Somy."” when you have wronged
SOMEONE,

Give other people a chance: 1© talk. Do not talk while someone lg
$l talking. When someone has sald sermething of valle fo YoU, say,
“Thank you." This will enceurage thie sume person fo give you Hore
Infermation in the future.

Al school pay atfention and carry out your teacher's Tnstructions
quickly and cheertully, Do your homework, it is part of leaning and
studying. Obey your teacher. Remember thal your teacher is there
to help you. At home, ebey yourparenty and be helpful Tes Thien.

Speak: to pedple with ESE sect ell the lime, Use the words, "SI" or
“Kadam, "when asking of answering older pe ople. Always greet
people politely and say, “Good bye." when you leave, Say, “| beg
your pardon,” when you want people 10 repeal what they have said
which you did net understand fully.

Ih numbers 35-38 choose the comest answers from the passage
above.
37. Good manners.

ig are wht we: goto 3 to school fo lean.

B. is the comect and accepted behaviour in public.

C. ks the way wa grgetather people anly.

D. ore the good things hat we do to our pares only,
38. When do you say, 'Good-bya?"

A, Whenyou greet people.

B. ‘When yeu sneeze ar cough.

€. When you are leaving.

B. When you are very grateful,



--- Page 153 ---
yousay."_

A | beg your pardon.
8. Iheard nothing.
C. You can repeat thal,
BD. What did you say?

(39. When you wari someone to repeat what Hey hove just sald,

| 40. Good manners never gst oul of fashion. This means thal goed
A. are like the clothes we pution.

B. change from time ta fifrie.

C. donot charige or end. :

0. ore only far those people who like fashion.

"English Pa per 2 Time: Thour 30 minuie 5

5 em
ES lL — —

Read his passage and answer the questions that follow. |
Hunan beirigs develep only two setsof feethin their ife-spicn, The first
sal of teeth to develop are Ihe primary teeth, These are also knowin
gs the milk teeth Ad the age of five to seven years, the primary teeth
| start te fall away.

The second set of teeth are kiown as the permanent testh. These
stay for the person's aiftire life-span. Tht is why they are Known as.
the permanent lezth, |

There dre lhree Types of teeth in the mouth. The first: eight teeth
| diteciiy in the front and centre-of The mouth afe calied the incisors:
| Thera gre Tour incisor

in the upper jaw, and four in the lower jaw.
These are Used for Breaking ‘arid cutting the food. For that reason,
| thigy are sometimes called the cutting teeth.

The next teeth m the mouth aie the tearing teath colled comines.
Thee are four canines ihe mouth: ene on each side:of the upper



--- Page 154 ---
Bering the canines oreithie molars of 3 grinding teath, There are five |
mgr on each side of both the upper and the lower jaw. This makes
a total of twenty molars nan adult pesen. The melars are fiat, just os
the grinding stores hove: flat top:

People must look after thelr teeth carefilly. Bod habits damage
the teeth. Examples of bad habits are: smoking tobacco; or biting
hard things like pieces of metal or wood. Some people even use
thei teeth to pullopen Botite jops. Eating sugary fi WBE
causes tosth decay or rot.

People con keep their teeth healthy Ihrough regular brushing,
‘especially offer meals. The bristing fremaves plague, tarter and
germs that couse-tooth decay. Atleast twice every year, one must
visit the dentist; or tooth specialist for o good check on their teeth,

From the pessage you have just recd above, answer these
queshions corecily,
1. ‘What isqdeantist?

2. How manysetsiof teeth does a person develop Ina life-span?
3. ‘Whatkthe namie of the first sét of a pefson's teeth?

4. Whats tha name of the second sel of q persen's feeth?

5 What causes tooth decay?

6. Whyis it very important 10: teke: care of our permanent set of

teeth?

7. How mony types af leath dre there Ind. parsons mouth?
8 ‘Which teeth are used for biting ar breaking food?

9. Why are the incisors also known as the cutting teeth?

10. How many caning teeth are there and whiot are they used for?

B. Writing a summary
In 12-15 lines, write d summary of the pascage Our teeth.
You con rmiake use of these Ideas:
- the imptartance of leeth
the fwe sels of testh
- the three types of teeth

| - taking care of teeth.



--- Page 155 ---
S— em ee To ——

AW, Ovuriowns and clites

B25 /

RSE

Looking dt the map of Zimbabwe with the fowns end cities, answer the

what is The name of the town or ¢ify nearest to your school?
Which tow or city: hove you been 197 |

Which town or clfy is near the Great Zimbabwe Runs?

Which city is near He Matora Hills?

Which town san the border betwen Zimbabwe and South Africa?
which city 1s on the eastern border of Zimbabwe?

whith fawn is near the western borderof Hebi?

Which fewis af on the border between @imbabwe and Zambia?

afl ofl AS of uh



--- Page 156 ---
Read: this passage and answer the questions thal follow:
Harare, the Sunshine City

popualcily sunshine lopnded botanic pienest column
Sulisbury ese avenue cere Jime minisier
universily sqadivm national British uri gulleny

, international

Harare, popularly known as thig Sunshine City becouse of its warm
weather is the capital city of Timbsatswis, It smears founded In the Year
1890 by the Pioneer Column. Then it was called Salisbury, after Lord
Salisbury who was the British Prime minister at that time,

The name of tha city was changed to Harare in the year 1982. The
name Harare cormss from the local Shona word, 'haatars’” which
medns ‘dogs not sleep’. Today, Harare i a very large city with many
high tise buildings. The tallest building, sifuated along Samora Machel
Avenug 5 the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. There are big hotels of
wold standard such as the Rainbow Towers, the Meikles, the Crowne:
Plea ang ricny others,

Other famous places iin Horore: melude the University of Zimbabwe,
the Mational Heraes' Acie: the National Sports Stadium, the: National
Art Gallery, the Harare Bottinic Gardens, the Harare International
Airport and mary offers.



--- Page 157 ---
Anawer these questions comrectiy.

1. What was the old name of the city of Harare?

2. By whom was the city of Harare founded and in which year?

3. "Why is Hotare known as thie Sunshine City?

4. ‘Who awngithe tallest building in Harare?

5. Which two other famous places are found in the city of Harare?
&. What da you think the Harare International Alport is used for?

Resparch |
Using the internet and other sources, find out more about the city of
Harare. Tell the class what you have found cut.

. $peak and write Jf

Adjeclives

Read these phrases aloud.

warm weather, cold weather wed wes
Tha words ir bold are called adjectives. These adjectives tell us.aboul
the [noun] weather. The words in the box below are Gl odjeclives, Say.
the adjectives aloud,

ther hot weather. dry weather

tall large kind cruel dry groven stork

{+1H ew slow. cloon dirfy: clever wise

warm ugly fhin young old ‘white sirong
bad weak good ‘hoppy smarl  noby rough
Answer (he lollowing questions using on adjective,

Herareis a city.

wauld like HGITAL Q car

QOurschogl hos "itis

obs GAP

Fing aul more aboul the city of Harare from fhe internet or from the
newspapers or from other people.



--- Page 158 ---
Then tell the class two or three things Thal you have found out about
Horst,
I have found auf that

In atelephone ions He names are aranged in diphabetical order.
These are the names of some of the famous places in theclty of Horgre:
Hermes! Acre

University of Iimbabwe

Rainbow Towers

Art Gallery

Meikles Hote

Naliohal Sports ts Stadium.

Ancnge and write {hese numes in alphabe
telaphone directory.
Note: wse the first letters: in their long names.

ical order a= they aii in the

Using who, whan, whore and which

Read these two sentences aitud:

Whe ih e rain stopped, | walked to fhe villiige where my fiend lives.
on the wiry | saw a man who wes riding o bicycle which was very new.
We ses

= when for time {the time when the rai stopped)

+ where [or places (the villoge whare my friend lives)

* wha for people fthe man:whio was riding a bicycle)

« which for things. {the bicycle which was very new]

Say your own sentences with where, who, when and which.

Complete Hiese sentences by filling in who, when, where and which.
1. The police aresfed the man started The veld fire
destroyed the tree plantation,



--- Page 159 ---
2 Tknow motherkeepsthe knife she usesinthekitchen.

3. Iwilvisitthefactery makes fumiiure goto Harare.
4. Thsisthecine__ mothers are expécting o :
5. sat on my char ____lwent phe)

Watling a business or formal lefter

Write a formal |gtier to the manager of ary ane of the hatelsin Harare:
asking fer overright decommisdeation. Inthe left say:

whit you are asking for, and for when

whether you like a single bedroom or a double bedroom

how you will pay for the cecommodation

whether g ‘or not you Will als toke medals al the hotel.

The Body of your leffer should not be mora than § lines.

LOL

E Fi kw

wil


--- Page 160 ---
Using words comecily

i on as the feacher says the following:

NWA we hove busy roads, Sometimes we have wet reads, and.
sometimes we have dry roads. There are fast and slow cars going up
and down the roads, Some of the cas arg new and others arg old.

Thee are sthiart cars and dty cars. There are gjso good elriviars and
y elfivers on our busy roads.

from what the feacher has just said cbove, answer hese questions.
What kind of reads do we have nowadays?

What kind of roads do we sometimes hove?

‘What kind of cars arg there on our roads?

Wert kind a ghee are here on out busy roads?

2
4,

Take tums to read this possoge aloud

Chuma and Tonde
‘Chuma ahd Tande:are clever men. Both mien live Tn the smoll town
of Nettpn. Both men dlse Workin the large ity of Horare, Both Chuma
and Tonde gréw up In the rral grees. Now both Chume ond Tonde
ive Tn the urban area. Chuma Is a tall man, while Tonde is &@ shart
man, Churna has black hair while Tonde: has grey hair.

Last month; both Chuma and Tonde bought cars. Chiuma bought a
new aor. Torde bought an old car. One day Tonde's old car broke
dawn on the busy, wide rodd io Harare. This 5 a busy road, Everyday



--- Page 161 ---
Using words correctly

f D Listen

Usien as the teacher says the following:

Nowadays we have busy roads. Sametimies we hive wel roads, and
somatimas we have dry roads. There are fash and slow cars going up
and sown the roads. Some of the cars are new and others ore old.
There are amar cors and dirty cars, There are alst goed drivers and
bad drivers an our busy roads.

From W wht the teacher has just said dbove, answer these questions.
1. Whot kind of roads.do we hove nowadays?

2. ‘What Kind of roads do we sometimes have?

3. What king of cars are there on our roads?

4, wWhal kind af drivers-ote thre aniour busy roads?

Chuma and Tonde
Chrurrigl and Tonde are clever man, Both man vein the small town
of Nortan, Both fien also work in thi large city of Harare. Both Chumao
and Tonde grew up in The rural dréas: Now bath. Chuma and Tande
ive in the urban area. Chuma so fall man, while Tonde is a short
man. Chuma hos black hair while Tonde has grey hair.

Last manth, both Chuma and Tonge bought cars. Chum bought a
new car. Tonda bought anold cor. One day Tonde's old car broke
down on the busy, wide rodd te Harore. This is a busy road. Everyday



--- Page 162 ---
Licih fast cars as well os slow Cars ws This rood. One front wheel of
Tohde's car had a fial tyre.

Chuma sow Tande's car on fhe busy, wide road. He stopped te help
his fiend. He got o long, sirong rope from his car, Than ha cul the
long, strong rope shart using a sharp knife, With that short, strona rope,
re used his mew. cor to pull Tonde's old car I Hors thee busy. wider road.

& fim: ie} he

$ J

somplede the senlences below by Sling in he right adjectives. The frst

nd

CES El

. Ther=-gre f Cars anid 5

thes of fhe adjectives hove been given fo help yau.
Chuma and Tonde wer © men, |
Chung and Tonde ved Inthe 5 towh af Norton,

They both workedinthe | _ «ity of Harare,

Chuma and Tonde grew up In ther CANE,

Now both Chuma and Tonde live in the Cire,

Chuma was a | mar while Tende wos a s ear.
Churma hgd © _hairwhlieTande had ¢¢ — haic

Chama bogghta n cor while Tonge boughl ano

car.

The rood between Norton and Hararesis avery broad,

cars that travel between

Morton and Harare.



--- Page 163 ---
11. One day, Tonde's cor bud af wiped while traveling to
Harare. _

12. Chumagota |_ and 5 rope from his own car

13, Then Chuma used a s knife to cut the long rope shert.

14, Chuma fhenusedthe s ond s__ rope topull Tonde's
car off the rood,

A compasEicn

When you write a composition, abvays try fo make use of Ihe right
adjectives.

Rewiite the Se Taan Hedow, choosing th

> most suitable adjective

A day I remember

One morning, molher sent me to the market to buy |sasy/green/
Clever vegelables, There were [good/smooth/dark) clouds inthe sky
and it was raining. When | gof to the stream from, the thigh/rianow)/
wide] mountains, | could fot go acess because it was [Blind/shart/
flooded), So I'walked to the bridge. After crossing the river using the
bridge, | gol ¢ fide in a seotch cart pulled by two [loud fslowfsoft)
donkeys. [twos not a (comfortablefthin/humibile) fide at oll The road
was [muddy/different/sharp] and there were {deep/straight/weak)
potholes. 1 sat an {round/wide wet) sacks full of poratoes. These wet
sacks, and the mud from the: (turning/silent/southern) wheels of the
cort made me and my clothes very (clever/dify/cean).

However | was very (gratefulfuseful/smpls) to the (comeat/kind/
lonely] man who gave me. the fide en his fcareful/sharpfweoeden)

scolchear. The kind (mad/young/eruel] man dso took me back
home, now with the (diy/empiy/smotth) sacks in his scetch-cart.

Mother wes [hoppy/sed/kindg] That 1 came back alivel She thanked
the young man and gave him some twarmirouns/rough) food. After
eating, the Kind, young man continued with his {strong/large/long]

journey. This is'a day 1 will always remember. |



--- Page 164 ---
Semis: a sourids like o: for example; in the words salt and ale
Learn to recite this short posi. Note that the'e sounds kero.

The ball on the lawn

‘While walking on the lawn at deiwit éne day,

| sew © ball falling an the green lawn —
The ball was falling from the tall well
Of the sriall hisll where we all mest
And talk with fiends when we Call

All friends to a meeting in the small hall,
Naw, with chalk |-can: draw

A ball falling on the green lown

From the tall wall of the small hall,

I

Spelling and dictation
Your teacher will call out some words and a paragraph from the
peitsage Chumia and Tonde while you write: them.

= Speck and write JE: Extra mile

Resadrch
First go to the internet and: find the information abot
below and then tell the class. You can also: find some information from

it the places listed

newspapers, | hooks and felévision and from other people in your area:

« the district in which your schoalis fuse Tis name)

= he prewvince in which you lives Tor example. Mashonaland West, or
Matabeleland South

- the famous mission station in your province (use its: nome)

« the Zambez River

- the Save River

» hig Kariba Dam

= the Ryle Dam, alse KNW as Lake Mulino,

Afterwards, write o poragroph about ore of these places.



--- Page 165 ---
Opposites |

ewrite these sentences replacing the underdined adjectives with their

sppRLes.
My brother teaches af a school which is In the rural area,
The: test that we wrote was not difficult.

Mast of he 1 ods

ir ihe why of Harare are redrow.
ries hill,

We fiovellod fo tHe caf na very fast bus,

From: our home, tha river is not very far.

Sha

Using adjectives
Ir thls. unit we leamt about adiectives or describing wiards,
Using the gh! adie Hye, answer hese questions in full, correct
sentences:
1. What kind of d person.gre you?
Say: lam a/an person,
2. What kind of country 5 Zimbabwe?
Say: Zimbabweisafan country.
3. Whaot kind of o season or year Is this season of year?
Say: This Is af

Revision and F—— 13

Read aloud clearly and fluently

| Grooming for young girls and boys
The word "grooming’ has fo de with developing good habls of
keeping clean and tidy, with good manners. Boys and is need to
ioke a bath regularly. This will keep them cledn ard smelling good

tall tha time: Take: bath whan you have done: samething: that made
vou-siweat lke work or spiotis,



--- Page 166 ---
Keeping our hairceon cand Holy px tite good grooming. It [5 very p alate]
graomirg fo go out with dirk. or pieces of cotton materials rong
on your bialr, Keep your fingernails clean. Short fingernalls are easier
to keep clean and tidy. Avoid biting your fingernails. Avoid picking
YOUE NOSE OF your gars in public; |

His: tse very: very Impoertant ta wash our hands frequently, Always
wash hands offer meals and after vding the toile], We use our Bonds
for greeting bre another. We also’ Use hands for Femdling fodd ang |
for scratching. Hands dre used for cleaning the oftier organs of the |
body. 56 keep vour hands cleant

People who are well-groomed wear clothes that fit well. Clothes |
should be clean and roned neatly. Even if they are old clothes, they

rmust be clean, and froned neath. Amy: tearing i in the old clothes |
shiolld be mandad neath.

wall-groamead children: always sit and weilk straight. They do not bend
inwards orforavards like ld man andwomen. When they greet people, |
they give them a firm haridshake while lodking strakght of hem. |

Under the heading Well-groomed children, write five senfences which |
show differen! things thal a well-groomed child should do or should |
noi do.
Start each sentence [five this:

= Awel-groomed child must/must not

Fram the passage you read cbove say whether each sentence below

is rue or false,

i. Good manners are part of grooming.

Youwill sell good even if you do nol take a both regulary,

3. Wel-groomed children go out with pieces of coflon moteial
hanging or their hei

oR



--- Page 167 ---
Langer finger-nails are easier to keep clean than shorter finger
niills,

wel-grobmed children de not bite their ingers or plok thelr noses

dnd earn publi.

Gur hands are véry busy argons of the body and must be washed
after meals and afterusing the toilet,

When fhigy walk, well-groomed children bend inwards or forwards
like old people.

Choose the suitable adjective to complele each sentence.

Even when yourclothes:are old, you should keep them
A. hoppy B, new C. clean D. fon
When the weather is we go out fishing.
A Jotle 8 fine TC. lowd DB. funny
There 5a _ free nex! to cur house.
TO | B. wide C. long In humble
People Who ore ‘donot take: meds gine.
A B. weglthy C. Khd D. healthy
The young male fe achér af our schools very:

C. wida D. handsome
9) you row that ceils water?

A. liguid B. solid CC. hat DO, soft



--- Page 168 ---
Learning does not end!

UNIT

# Read and listen 9 )

Using a dictionary
We use a dictionary lo learn the correc! meamngs of new words:
some words have the same sound but very different speling and

lock, listen carefully as your leacher soys these words ‘and their

aliowed Permitted, or given permission. for example. The teacher
allowed children to go home.
aloud loudly, so tha! ol can hear, for example, We dll heard what
oo she said because she spake oloud.
foair Good for everyone, Tor example. The réfarea was very fair
to bath football tears:
lees The money you pey:to travel by bus, train, or plang, for
example, The conductor gives you do Ticket when you pay
| “the stare. oo
floor ...... The battom of arwom on which we walk, far example, Mothe:
sweeps the floor daily.
flow The movemenl of d liquid like water, for example; The rfivers. |
oll flow whan Tt rains.
har ......... Fibres. that grow on your head and begdy, for ekample.
Mother keeps long hair on her head.
hore Asal aniendl that is-alse kncwn asa ratikit, tor example,
The hare is a srmoll animel thal eats grassand leaves of plants.
heard... The past terse of hear, which means to liste. for exami, |
heard an the radio the good news that the weather will be |
fire,
herd Agroupol cotter iorge animals like alephants, forexampls, |
The herd boy lboks erffer the hard of cattle,



--- Page 169 ---
made Post terise of make; fa build, for example; Most shiogs are
migde of leather,

mald _._....A wornan house servant. forexample, Our family has:a maid
whi takes core of the tiaby.

meat | The flesh of oh animal that is satan, for example, We buy
‘gadd meat from the butcher, oo oo

moe! Agree to see, for example, The friends always meet ¢

shops and play together.

peace.....A time afquiet; a fime of no fighting, torexemple, After the
, There was peace.

piece. A small part 1 a big hing, Tor example, | ofe a sm
of bread thet he hod laff.

price... Thegostol something, foraxample, The price of the new suit
wes a Hundred dellars.

prize ....... Arewdrd for dbing sométhing good, forexaniple, At the ging
of thé tern. |. gol the first prize Rar coming els Hy class.

wcilet The part of your body between the ribs and the hips; for
example; We tie our balls round the waist,

waste. To use more Ihan what is needed; lo spend carelessly, for
erompie: ‘Weiter Is precious! we must not waste it.

Using the dictioriary above, rewrite these sentences with the connec)

pra from the brackeals.

1. 1 heard, herd) the: voice of ray mother specking tomy teqcher

2. Time Is money and we must rol (woist, waste} Th

3. When pedple dre fighting, theres no (Blech, peace),

4. All the rivers from Zimbabwe (fioor, flow! inte tHe Indian Ocsan; to
the east of Africa,

5. Durng morning assembly at schol, the headmaster speaks (aloud,
dllowed) fous.

6, The bus- {fair fare] to town has been incredsed twice This year.

7. Ha came adt first in the mice and won the best (price. prize).

8. The [meat, meat] from sheep is called mutton.

9. 1Tke to keep very short (hare, hair on my head, If Keasier to comb,

10. Matorgar tyres are riaid, made) of ruber,



--- Page 170 ---
| Helping cut around the home
simple oshamed tasks succeed ensure k
examples choordully leundry obodien! hoalthy
siblings. enough willing important improve |
equal

AS you grow up, you leamimany new — Ce of fie ings you
should leam & helping aut-around the home. Helping out ground the
heme is very simple; but very impartant in fife. twill improve the life vou
and yeiur family ive, You will oso net feel ashamed when friends visit
ya. | |
There are many
small jobs that you,
can da to:help out
around the house. P "
Yau can sweep Pr Ny ===
the ficor or the G0 FERRET Em F Lal!
yard and take the es a | Em pl
rubbish to the pit or 4
bin. You corn clean
the plates and the  &
dishes. You can
mgke: your own
bed and the beds
of your young b : '
siblings in the morning. You con clean the toilet, — the garden,
and feed the chickens or the pel. Everyone, bovs.cr girls can do all
these jobs to help around.

NW Felps fo make a short list of the tdsks you would Tke to do wach
day. Making a list will ensure that you do riot férget some important
tasks. With g list, you will not stop la think what to de next. That way
wend will enjoy helping out around your home:



--- Page 171 ---
In helping out around the heme, work closely with: your parents. When
hey are daliig, laungiry of are busy in fhe kitchen, go there and help:
oui. When they are working in the garden, millkirigy fe cow, proving
firewood, go there to help. Boys and gifs are equdl. and carn do the
same jobs. ts even better when brother and sister work together,

Watch carefully ond do the |obs as your parents show you. Follow
their examples cheerfully. This wil show: that you are willing ta learn.
Be obedienl all the firme: When parents give you rigs, obey: them,
The rules are-meant fo Ree you in life. When Hey tell you to work
hard, they wart vou 1a succeed. When they fell you to be clean, they
want you to live a healthy fife. When they tell you io goto bed early.
they want you to get enough rest.

Answer these questions from the passage coectly,
1. Wriish of these statements s hue?
A, ‘Soma jobs are only for boys, others are:dlse only for.glrs.
B: Boys cannct do warkin fhe kitchen.
©. Herding cattle or goofs [5 boys! work, not-for girs:
0. All jobs can be done by bolh boys and girls,
2. Who, are the ‘young siblings’ menfioned in the possage?
£2: Schoo children.
B. Young brothers and sisters:
C. The beds on which the Shildién sles.
D. The pares.
3. Whaotlsa task?
A: Something that you have to do;
B. Aist of things:
C. ‘Arie that must be ebéyved,
D0. Anexample giverby the parents,
4, When parents fell you to work hard, they want
A. to give you soma money:
B. you lo succeedin life
2 to make you suffer



--- Page 172 ---
5. Good children help out around the house
A. sorrowtully
C. eheerfully

Read and speak wh

Using adverbs

Maria
Today Marla come io school arly, Shewas dressed wnestly, She came
itty the classroom and sot In front quictly inmmedioiely. she begon
looking Git the test: She rede the questions carefully and answered ofl
them coractly. She wrote the test neatly and quickly. Then she handed
her answer papers pulitaly fe the teacher. Alfenweards she walked suitly
towards the door, She wen! oubsidr slowly, but bapplly. nmin iotely,
her fnerids joined her,

hs i of
Answer these questions rom the passage an Maria above.
Murmhers 1, 3, and 11 have been dani lar you os examples
1. ‘When did Maria come to scheol? (Answer: Today.)
What time did she come fo school?

How was-she dressed? (Answer: Simarily,)

Where did she sitin the classream? {twe ward)

Pe fr hy



--- Page 173 ---
5. How did she sit inv the classroom?
6. ‘Whei did she begin ouking al the besky

7. How didshe read fhe gusstions?

8. How did she drswer dll the questions?

9. How did she write the test? (two words)

10, How did she bein her answer papers fo the feocher?

11. When did stiér walk towards the doar? [Answer Afterwards.)
12. Where to did she walk?

13. How did she well?

14. Where did she go?

15. ‘How did she go?

14. Whan did hee fried Juin Her?

f The: words you wed in answeting the questions above are called
n adverbs. Adverbs tell us when, where, what and how.

_

Rewrite these sentences with the most suitable adverb rom the brackets,
1. You must get up well, carly, still] if you want to catch the first

raring bus:

2 Tell them notte play [noisty, quietly. Guickly) when affiers ore busy
studying.

3. If you walk: (hurriedly. only, slowly) like that, you will be late for
school.

4. 'Whenocarisreversing, ltEmoving [sideways | barclewards, fanwaris).

5, The spectators wera dl chesrinig me as | fan (fowards; inside, hard).
fhe finishing ine. |

4. The weather her is not abwoys bel sometimes, always, only) it is
vary old,

7. You mus stand [still, soon, asl] when you are tald not to move.

8 AnfEand lo piece. of land that i (almost seldom, completely
surrounded by watse.

EE wie:
Writing informal lefters

In 3-4 paragraphs in 12-15 lines, wiite a |étter to your friend telling him!
her what you do'to help out around your fa family home: Stan the letter

By saying:



--- Page 174 ---
Ihave ledried to help oul ground our house in many ways. Everyday,
before | go o'school | ;
Then say:
~ what yeu do dally before you go to school
- wie you do everyday after school
- what vou do during the weekend
- what you sometimes. do during the holidays
~ whether or not it is impertant to help out areund the house, ind how.

Some adverbs do not end with -ly

Leaok al this dictionary section that explains some of these adverbs;
always ......on eYery. Geos
ever ort any fime: past; pres
Never... -.not atoll, or at nofime
ofen....... © ‘many gcoasions oron many situations
seldom ,.....rarsly, of not often

sometimes....on some occasions bul not gn oll cceasians
very —.......used for emphasiang

Say your own sentence with each of the adverbs above.

it or future

Rewiile these senfences replacing fhe underfined words with c suitable
adverb from the adverbs above.
50 ne oes aos, the president travels ino hellcopler,
on every occasion be smart.
We: must 0 Fat all be Tate for schol.
havi. on rman iyogoodens iar that man of the Shops.

Neh

Spelling and dictation
Your teacher will call out seme words and orig paragrapt from Helplr—
aut around the home while you write them.



--- Page 175 ---
Look, llzten and repeat what your tetcher says about the children in the
picture below.

shortest
far
nearest

about fhe children.
| Doni tal,
Sekallis taller than Don,
Simba is the tallest of the three chillaren,

| Point fo the child in the picture as you repeatwhet your teacher is saying

Simba Is short.



--- Page 176 ---
Sekai lsshorter than Simba.

Dan is thie shortest of therm all.

Dion is tar from thebig tree.

Sekaiis farther front Ihe big free than Dor.

Ofthe three children, Sirhba is the farthest fiom thie big free

Simba is near the big tree.
Sekai is. nexqrer the blg free thiart Sekai,
of Fie three children, Don is fiearést the big free.

Neate:

= odd -er when you corm ;

= add -est when you compare three or more than three things.

« repldce fhe letter y'with the letter 1 in adjectives that end with y
for exgimple, easy, dirty etc.

Using each one of fhe words below, make three sentences in which
‘you compare three things or three people:
lang young big high pretty dean fiat sweet ey
fast lozy slow pew old hard heavy clever diy

Rewrite these sentences corecily with the conrect form of the adjective
In brackets.

is Zimbabwe's {8d} city.

Digf you Know: test light travels fast) then sourd?

Takzethis the clever) girl m-our class:

Christmas doy is one of the (happy) days al over the world.
A Tubhkisty dumps [dirty] haha compost heap.

Ho ppt

Read this passage and answer the question tha! fallow.
B The: earth
planet  diometer surface revolution



--- Page 177 ---
sthiyligitl LIEW Pena ad ford Pad FEE
voloanges log.c irererthe Me

The earth an which we live #4 vi big aircle shaped lke = huge ball. Like
all clrezless, the earth has a diometer. This Is the distance from ene side
of ihe sowth through he: canldees bo the other side. the diameter of the
earth in twelve thousand: seven honed ond siddy kilometres,

The garthis a planed. Other planets are the mes and the stars we see
afnight. Planets are korge, round objects. Allplanats arn always moving
rendined the sun. The survis ones hundred ard Gfty million klometras away
fram the: earth, The moon is the planet nearest thie earth, it 5 lives
uf icdresed eased eiegbiby Tour hesoned, four hundred kilometres diver,

All the planets, including the moon do nat have ight of their own.
They get their ight rom the sun. Meanlight Is actually sunlight that
chines an the surfeca of the moon,

The sun i#self does hod move al all IT is he earth that B&B moving,
Ther journey of the earth fabt round the sun i called the revolution:
SA revolution takes three hunched and’ sicy-fives days or a yer, The
revolution of the coh eooses He differen) seasons of the yaar, There
are four sedsans in a yearn These are summer autumn, winter and
SENIRG.



--- Page 178 ---
While the earth rnoves round thesun, itis also turning round end round
on its-own. THis luming round of the garth on its own ik called the
retation. The rotation of thie earth causes day aiid right. When our
sicle of the earth is focing the sun, we hove: dy. When ourside of fhe
earth Is: fumed. mwiery fron Hee sun, we have night. The rotation of the:
earth tokes twenty-four hours, erone full day,

The earth is the only planet thal haswater and oxygen. Oxygen is the:
air we bigathe. That is why plants arid animals are found only an the:

The cerire ofthe earth is full of het gids. The surface of the ecrfh ls
fragile. meaning that it can easily be! broker) or cracked. Sometimes
the surlace breaks open. Then the bat llguids shoot out to: the surface.
That Is wheti'we have volcanoes. or earthiguakes, Eoritiguokes have
caused many deaths and desiruchion wheh bulidings fall. king
people and animals.

Choose the conect answers.
1. What dess the word ‘huge’ in the fist paragraph mean?

A Nery small, B. Wary soft.
iC. Vary big, D. Very hard,

2. Which of these worchs best d deectiosy the shape of the earth?
A. Hat. B. Rounel

3. What causes the seasons of the: year?
A. The tevolution of the arth,
B. The rotation of the earth.

C. The moon,
Cx. The planets.
4, The rotation of the=arlh causes
A. eqrthgquakes EB. volcanoes
C. sunlight D. day and night

5. Which of the following objects is fragile?

A; Gloss. - B. Rock
C. Metal. D. Wea.



--- Page 179 ---
#Read and speak —

The longi sounds of ge, eq, je as in cheese, eat, shield
First, read and then reciie this poem correctly.

fA funny dream

One week | had this funny dream

In the dredrm| see my neces.

Cleaning hier feet by a stream |
That fiows past the green elds. of |
wheat.

Then the bealing. of the drums wakes |

me Up

From my deep sleep.

Say these words correctly. They all have the long ea/eefie.

beat wheels, sieve edt street believe ietison
indeed repeat relief leaves inciease plese bleed

A composiiion

Imagine that your brdther went on a journey and then wiote a
eompesition about it: His teacher looked at the composition, and put
all the-mistakes in brackets.

Rewrite the compesifion with the comree! forms of the adjectives In the
mackets.

My joumey fo Gweru!
Qne day | was traveling to the city:of Gwery fo visit my sister Befty:
Batty isthe (old) child in our familly. Many people alsosay she's the
(pretty) of my four sisters.

Half-way on the joumeay. the old bus | was traveling on broke down,
Just then a [smal] but {fost] bus come glong and picked all the
passengers. [Fwies alto & (new) bus than the first bus,



--- Page 180 ---
Before dusk, we were in Gwar. | was very happy that hod completed

my loumeysafely. | was ever (happy) when | saw Betty waiting far me.
Gweru Ts florge) than Gwanda where | came from, The weather was
alse [celd) in Gweru than in Gwanda. | naticed that my sister. Betty:
wats isoking [pratiy) ond {smart} thonwhen | hod last seen her at home:

Spelling and diclalion

Your teacher will coll gut some words and one parggrapti from the

passage The earth while you write them.

Opposing }
Sometimes wa understand ne mean

ws of odjectives by saying: thgir
appeses it fair exa pice person who is awoke is not asleep. Awake is the

In each sentence below, choose the right opposite of the undertinad
atliective,
LL Aswimming pool thats deg

A wide B. long Cc. shallow LO. dangérmus.
2. A piece of waed that is hard ls not. —

AL pasy B. soft C. wet D. dry
3. Amotoredr driver whe Isgorafy isnef__

A. coreles  B, clever C. wisg D. Fast
4 A person wha is kind is not

wi sod B: somy e. happy Bo cre
5. Whe something is alive, itis. er —

A. decd B. ‘sick C. heathy Dil
4. Someone wha lc —___ oo

A. alone B. honest C. sure D. active
7. A horgworking personissomeonewho isnot

A fled  B laity Ch. busy 0. resting

8. A smiorl person is someone who isnot
A. dirty B. young  €. clean b. greedy



--- Page 181 ---
Adjectives
Say a senfence in whith yau describe each of these things with a
sultable adjective of your own:

the: moon the river the knife. your friend
yourmother tholeocher  yowrschoeol the mght
the rain the, lightning your dog the road
the free. the fiom ie town the ehildren

Revition and asseszmant 14

listen carefully and cay out 2 - 3 of the foliowing insiruciions from
your teacher:

- = slowty/quisily/ like on old person
~ twas tha door

Ty Ber ees

. - round the table
- es The table.

Redd this passage Muenlly and answer The guesiions that follow.

‘When father was late for work
When we saw father doing every in-a hurry, we could tell that |
he was late for work: Mother tied to help to speed up things so that
father would not waste more time, While father wus faking d quick
shower, mother quickly grépared his breakfast and put it onthe jake.
She: then joined father in the bedroom fe help him dress up. quickly.
My four-year old brother saw all the hurry and decided to help to



--- Page 182 ---
speedup things in his cw way. He quietly sat atthe table and quickly |
ate father's breckiast so thot father would not waste lime eating. |
When father came fo sit aft the faible for & quick breakast. the plates

| were empty. Seeing his, mether hurladly siarted prepiring father's
breakfast again. =

| IE write | |
Whit showed that farther was late far work?
hot wis mother ing when father was laking a quick shower? |
In whist woy did the four-year old boy try: to help father fo speed
up? |

4. why did mother notseg the srniall boy etifing father's breckiast?:
5. ‘Wiiich two words tell us how the boy cte his father's breakfas!.

Find a short sory on the intemal or kom other people. Then, in not |
| mare han two minutes, retell the story ta the class,

i: Speak

Make two sentences with the paits of words, one sentence with each

woid lo show that you undessiond the different meanings ol the two

words in each pait. |

lnera/heard  clecsfpedce  wolst/waste |
dliowed/aloud.  price/prize meet/medt |



--- Page 183 ---
What some people do to make a living

UNIT ETT

© Listen and speak ms

rere to your teacher asking you these guesiions and answer them In
short using can/can't and do/don't.

Ro you wash your ow clothes athome?

Can you pressfiron your own clothes?”

Do you polish your own shees.at home?

Ba you help: mother to wash the dishes?

Can-you make some leafpomde?

Cain you cook sadr/fvegetables?

Do you sometimes work in the garden/fields?

Bova help mother fo sweepfscrub the floor?

# 1% 8 W 4 ¥ ¥

Using the words first, then, next; alter that, finally

Listen fo your teaches asking you these questions and answer them in
short.

When yoll palish yaur shoes:

Whit do you do first?

Then what do you do next?

After that what do you do?

Finally what go you do?

Using the wotds first, then, next. offer that, finally speck to the class on
one of the following:

= how you make some faa

how'you make some porridge
‘how you couk vegetables

how you make a fire

howe you clean the floor in your family houses:



--- Page 184 ---
+ Pow you dooyour homework
« how yeu prepare to go to school.

Using. ot elie Honoiry

We can always [Gok UD new wards In a dictionary, Read thase words
and their macnings: |
getual .. Red, hus, for example, | Tke farming, but my actual job is

admire... To Think Fiat ¢ gt something. to leek at samefhing with
pleasure, for example, admire soccer players who score
rary goals.

carpenters, Someone who makes things-out of wood, for example, A
carpenter rAckes chairs,

carving... Cutfing stone or wodd rmiaking obec
brother wis carving stone objects

college... A place for higher learning where ong can corn special
skills, for example. My sister is now. of college, fraining fo
nweceme g hedchsl.

enginger... Sameone who thinks dnd makes plans fo make new things
likes: rots, railweys, dams, towns, ete. far example, The job
of a town angineer is very important.

knitfing... To mike a garmen, jersey, gloves, a hat, ete. using wool
yer with knitting mesdles

lecturer -.. A teacher af @ college, fof example, Madam Moeyo'is a

lectures | in:Sclenca at the: college.
schanic,. Sormgone who fixes or repairs: engines, farexample: The
oo mathaic is repaiiing cure.

plumber... Someane whe fikes of repairs watér pipes, for example.
Father called a plumber te fil in the wafer pipes into our
garden,

practical... Something useful ond real or actual that is done in using
vor hards and taals, for example, Agriculiure ard
woachvork ore practical subjacts. Co

otincipal.. The head of a.cellege, tor example. The pfincipol of a
neni isiarlegrmed person.

sudent.... Someorestudying al g college; forexample, My sister isa
ata Teacher sColege.

5. for example, My

TT] TE


--- Page 185 ---
technical About the spietial skills to do something, for exemple, |
would like to learn the technical skils 6f using a computer.

Read the pe Age patie Lee he ddiclicnory ahove §# you do not kndw
fhe meanings ol waite of De words in fhe possage,

Leaning does not end]
Aftarsecondary school, Tamukawould like te go to atechnical college.
Thera Tamuka will frain fo liscome either an apngingear or tl mechame,

Tamuka's father Is o lecturer ato technical college: His mother is thie
principal at the some college. Somefimes, Tamuks goes fo watch the
students leam the practical skills.

Tamuka enjoys watching the student mechanics fix or repalr motar car
engines, Sometimes he watches the student plumbers fik or repair water
pipes: Sometimes he goes lo ses the student carpentars making fables,
chairs, claors, beds; and other pieces of funiture.

Peoplecan: — PR skills if hig. Pedple car learnidme
praciicol sills from other people: Tamuka has seen men and women
making mats: ar taskets from reeds. He: has seen women making



--- Page 186 ---
wandariul ckay pols. He has seen his awn parents working together
to bake cakes and buns cl ome. All these.are usedul practical skills.

|

mL

Tarmuka has alse sean people by Ihe roadside making beautiful stone

orwood carvings. He hasseen mer ond women knitting warm Jerseys.
sowing different types of clothes. making very strong sandals fom old
matar car lyres and making different types of children's toys: for soils,
He has seen boys and girls feeding chickens for meat or for eggs and
rowing vegetables in the bock-yard gardens,

All these people are making a living out of these simple practical jobs.
Tamuka has decided to leam some: of these simple: practical skills]
Yau toe cdr start learning one or rere of these simple, practical jobs.

IE write

Choose the comect answers from the passage read. |
1. Tomuke would liketo go to a college to train elther as an engineer
or os © mechanic, This maarns that he would like to become:
A. on engines ond not a mechanic
B. a mechanic and not an anglnesar
. bothqan engineer and a mechanic
D. ‘ane df the wa ah engineer ora mechanic:

|B

Lad


--- Page 187 ---
Cine word for tables, chairs. beds, and wardrobes togefherds _
AL skills B. furmitore. C. machines 0. copentars
3. The passage also tells us that
WA. people can learn from ona aneiierin lhe homes
B. people can only sam practical jobs in the colleges
C. practical jobs pre very dificult fo do
D, Tong ogo; there were no practical jobs
4, Practical skills are very useful becouse :
A. men people work hard
B. only afew people like to work
C. they ore leamed fn the colleges
D. they enable peopl to make: build and repairs things
5. Someone who studying at a colleges called a.
A lecturer B principal C. student Ch. mechanic

Using would

Using fhe dictionary In this unit, answer this question in full:

What i. practical skil?

Tell the class about two practical skills: one that you have already leamt
‘dnd another that you would Tike to learn.

Speak like His;

| have gready learnt the practical skill of .

This 5 yer 1 would lke fo earn fhe practical skill of ;

| Read and a

A lesmcl or business teller
Looking at the formal ar business lelter on the next page. answer these:
questions:
How many cddresses does a formal efter have?
Who. wrote thet letter? Give fhe full nares.
Wher was the letter written?
what wigs the address of the person who wrote that format letter?
Towhom wos the letter addressed?
Show ond say the full ad dress to whem he letterwos addressed?
De you think Chiegza Madiro was known fo Mr and Mrs Chitima at
the time of writing this letter? Why de you think:sa?

-

N gen Bop oy



--- Page 188 ---
What are the differences ietweean 0 formal lelfes business lelic
and the informal letters that you have been writing to fiends and
relafives oll aleng?

Private Bog 505
Maisvings

Mr and Mrs Chitimg

Mukarn Village

Dear SirfMadam

allow me to come and spend one week wiih Jou and team to make ell

| pots. I am 3m to be on sehbol Foliday Fron: the | fourth of August ET
‘of September 2017,

You con chats the week for mie 10 come over during the school holiday,

T am nm girl mged ten. | am tn Grode Four af the ‘above-mentitmed
school To to church every week. Ar school 1 gm in the. aba tec Jor Toes

am “a polite ang ary | obedient child:

Your village i is: within walking distance from ours. 1 will be uble to come e I ke
| morning and return home: late in the afternoon. My parents. are very keer and
happy for mets learn how to maka clay pots from weilbknown potters like you.

[hark yout adheance. | lnok fama to hearing from yon
Yours faithfully
[Che@i Made



--- Page 189 ---
EE

Hg === e———igeo—

A forma tettor
Write a formal letter to o family thats well-known for dofig o practical
job which yeu would like to leam from them, Follow the Idy-out fhat

‘Chiedza Modiro used in her own larmalt letter to the Chitima family.

| 1 Write: Extra mile |

er

Using a dictionary
There > many English words with similorsound but different spellings:

Alwrerys. use o dictionary when you.are not sure which word fo write.

highes ......... High - higher highest, net low, for example. A mountain,
B® is higher thar a hill,

HitGann- TO pay 10 Use somaifihg Then efum it, for example: Our
school can hire bus for the trip.

stated, To walk together with simile steps, for example, The
soldiers march evanyday,

maich.., A game played between wa sides: for example, A football
match.

oT JRO | ite i fl plant that grows underground.

wale... A way ar rotd of geting to a place. for example, The route
16 fhe market.

1303, oo... ASD, Mga than, for example, Too much ding or | am going
there foo.

wis .....Pair, for example, One plus one rhicks wo,

watsther.. The cufide condiians of a place of d'specific tire, Tor
emmple, Hot weather,

whether, If, for example, do not know whether he is coming today.

Using The diclionay seclion above choose The correc] word from the
brackel: fo complebe each sehfence.

1. In‘sumimier the (wheather weather) is hot and wet.

2 Tea doesnot foste good iF you put (too, hw] fauch sugar init.

3. My parents will. [higher hire) a big hall for my brother's wedding.

4. On Sunday we went to the grounds to watch a seceer (march,

rrictch).

wow How d peison whi Is Blind finds the route, rect)



--- Page 190 ---
Revision and assessment 15

Road this passage and answer the questions thal follow.

Honey bees Co
THe sweet honey thal many people enjoy eating Is made by fhe
bees. To make the honey. the bees se pollen and nectar from the
| fiowers: The bees fiy from one lower to another collecting thie pafien
tnd nectar.

‘Honey bees five in a hive. They live in a large swarm called a coleny:
In every colony, there ore thee different types of bees.

The mother bea of ¢ colony is called the queen bes. The queen bee
can live: for up fo four years. The main duty of the queen bas isto lay
Is busiest in the summer season. Dung summer, she €an lay up lo two
thousand, five hundred eggs per day. The queen bee also keeps al

| the other bees unter goritrol,

The bees that we see flying around are Salle

the worker bees. The worker bees are all |
females githough they do not lay.eggs. They

are the bees that collect pollen and nectar

from the flowers. They are the bees thal make
the honey: Some of the worker bees are the | SS
soldi that protect the queen.and the hive. |
These are the bees that sting when the hive is
disturbed. The average life span of awerker
Beek five to sh weeks only.



--- Page 191 ---
E The third type of bees in & colony are all males caled Crone Teer
mdin duty 5 to mate with the queen so thet she po produces tees:
par that reason, the drones ore someshmes called he Hatha! of tke

Today, itis very sad that the colonies of beas are disappearing. This ws
lergely because people are destroying the forests used by the bees
to sei up their hives. h |

Int numbers 1-8 choose the comect answer from the pa
1. ‘Whot is this passage: Hailking about?
A. Honey.
8. Honey bees,
C. Planing more frees.
D. Flower, fruits ond seed:
2. The gusen bea can live or LL
A. only.o few days
B. five 10 six weeks
N up te ten years
Lp fo four years
3. i type of bees mate with ihe queen bee?
A. The warker bees.
B. The solgfiers.
C. The drones.
D. All the bees inthe hive.
4. Which of thesa stafernants i nse?
A. All the female beesin a colony lay eggs.
‘B, The.gueen bee guards the hive.
C. Hdl the drones are females.
On. ‘Only Ths gueen Doe loys eggs. |
5. Which bees are sometimes colled the “fathers of the colony?

sage read.

C The Gundn,

Nn. All the bees in ahve.
4 The'bees that we see flying about are the

A theworker bees

B. thedrohes

LC. the queen bass

D. ones ipot also lay eggs



--- Page 192 ---
7. Today. it 5 very sad that the colonies of bres are disoppeanng. |
The word "today" In this sentence means
JA. gveryday
B. on this day only.
C. NOWCCICYS
one day:
Eg. Ac carding to this passage, whose faultis it thal the bee colonies
Be disdppeanng?
A. The queen bee.
B. Poop fro
B. Tho worker bees

In rupmbers 9-12 choose the most suitable odiective lo fll in the
blank spaces.

9. Chrisirnas day is always a holiday in Zimbabwe.
A. sudden B. dow LC. public D. fine

10 The Zombeziis a fiver, If lows throughout the year,

A. Inng B. fisaded C. beautiful .D. perennial
Jarare is.also known as the. Surishine Clty Because of its _

weather,

A. warm B. cold C. cloudy. 0. fresh
12. During the rainy seasen the roads bacome i

A, SRAOUS B. slippery C.'heovy  D. shaight

In numbers 13-15 choose one word fo replace the urdetlined phrasa

in each sentence.

13. The school bus was camyng thie children wha sing together in
ene:groypy to the show.
ra =hureh B. class C. team EB: ghoir

14. Ittook the workersd paodiof two weeks to complete the job.
A. week B. Tartiight C. menth DD sadspn

15. My brother works a5 a foreman in ao place wise : CIE

BE. tactory C. shop D: station

In numbers 16-19 choose one wad that means the opposite of the:
underlined word.
A. plush B. cut C. B. i

|



--- Page 193 ---
| 20. lamvery forthe present that youssant me.

(17. Inseme places (he read 16 lown is very wide.
A. fio B, namsw Cough 0, -siraight

| 18. That tall ree with ne leaves & plive.

A. hard B: high C. dead 3, §oft

A wrong B. ‘difficut GC. bad D. dangerous: |

in numbess 20-23 choose the comec! word jo fill in the blank space.

A. kind B. grateful C. useful  D. success
a3 Mother prepared some food for the visitors:

A. correct B Honest 'C. delicious D. clever
22. The helleopterwos fiying so. ihat'we could see fhe

river waving his bond. ]

A. nelly B fast C. low BD. away
23. ‘When he was asked where he was golng, he: politely:

A. replied 8. wondered C. forgot D. shouted

ul

x Read
Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Rain is something thet plants and animals, including people
do without. That is why people call wate the ‘precious liquid’.

Yet, when it rains memy people just lef the water flow aw
who do this are not aware thal rain water can Harves
fhe crops we grow.

Gy. Peaple
fed just likes

Harvesting water simply. means collecting the running water far later

uses, While [tis raining, water can be direcled info ¢ pond, tank, drum, |

| bucket or dish. Rafi water can also be directed inte a reserve, the
| name for a small water sterage dam,

The first rain waler is usually dirty and not goed for use because il
carriay dust, and leaves. People should lat this first rein water flow |
‘away and net harves] it. Then. when all the dirt has heen washet
| away, the clean rain water tial follows can be harvested.

|


--- Page 194 ---


--- Page 195 ---
A very difficult te do

BE. ecsytodo

should be dine by:children only
I. should not be done by children

in numbers 31-35 choose the word thet has the same meaning asthe
underlined wad,
31. tis w nitrue that his father owns a big farm.

B. agreed C. Tabkea- D. certain
32, Sur mirner rls usually a miny season here:
A. hot B. wel C. calm D. fing:
33. The door vost hut by the strong wind.

elas B. opened C. damitiged 'D. closed

34. The pice. of bread hos.gone up By two cents per loaf.
AL size RB. wsight . cost P: prize-
35. The: Avstis fie. border between the two farms.

B. waterway. C. boundary DB. ending

| ar flat and thin

But |. amysharp,

Sometimes very sharp;
Which is why

Mathers lke me in their kitchens
Where | eqsily-shce:

Thin meat,

Their vegetables.

Their bread and cakes foo.
Arid; TF they mokea mistake:
Their firigess too;

L Although | eai'nane of tem.

In numbers 36-38 choose the coneot answer from the poem above, |
34. Which of thess da vau think E the best heading for this peem?
A. A kifeken C. Aknife, D. Mothers.



--- Page 196 ---
37. The word slice in this poam means .
A. cut B. sat C.lke  D.shdrp
38. This poem says that sometimes mothers
A. keep very [Hie meat in their kitchens
B. have no vegelables io cook
C. cut their awn fing by mistake
D. do noteat meat ar vegelakdes, bread on cukes
39. Chase thecurrechword ta fillin the emply spacein thissentance:
| Passengers must riot get off the busuniil itis _ i
| A. siafionery  E. empty C. stationary ID. rnoving
40. Choose the senfance that is written contecily. |
A. The Matebo Hils are to the south of the city of Bulawayo.
BE. The Matoto hills are to the South of the City of Bulawtiyo

C. The Matobo Hilsiare to fhe south of the chy of BUlcwayo?
D. Tha Matobo Hills are to thie south, of the tity. of Bulowaye!

| English Paper 2 Thmie: Thour 45 minutes

Read this passage and answer the qu egions that {oflow.

At the age of ux, Palda had learned lo ride bicyele. She wanted
to fide it to school and fo the shops. She wanted her fiends 10 see
her riding @ bicycle, but her parents would nol kt Ber do thal. They
wanted herie learn the niles of using thie road safely first. They fold
her that many rdad gels rhs are caused by people who wie he
road when they do not know Ihe rules
| of the road,
Fareyclists. rule nurmberoneis to check &
tha the bicycles fit to-go on tharoad. |
The Bicycle. mus! kaye warking brokes, [If
‘Without the brakes, the bicycle cannol. | §
be dowed down or stopped, It mus!
be fitted with a lamp for fighting when
it-gets dark. The bicycle must have o



--- Page 197 ---
reflector The reflector makes it easier for motorists af the back to see |
the eyclist easily, even when it is-dark:

Cyclists’ must ride on the far left side of the rood. They must move
straight and not sway from: one side 16 another. Af night, ovalists
must wear Bright clothes to make themselves visible ta the motorists.
Cyelists should know and obey the road signs. Whers there sa aycle
frack, the: Cyclists should use it ond keep out ¢f the main road. Where
here are signs for children or for animals, cyclists should slow down.
They should be ready 16 stop guickly. Where it says: ‘Give Way" or
‘Stop’ cyclists must do exaclly hot:

In. seme towns and cities, there are traffic lights. Waifie lights conirol
‘the movement of fraffic, Traffic Tights urn red, green ond amber.
When the traffic lights turn red, cyclists must step: It is-dangerous to
ge through red traffic lights. When the traffic lights turn green, cyclists
ray move onif it is safe 10 do so. When The traffic lights turn amber,
cyclists must slow dow ond prepare to stop.

Cyclists should also not camy things that are heavier than themselves
‘on their bicycles: Heavier things make: 1h vary clifficull to keep the
Bicyeéle uhder conirol,

A. Answer the following questions comectly.

What do yew think a cyclist |?

2. ‘Why did Poida's parents not let her ride the bicycle to school
and fo the shops?

3. By which people are muny of the accidents on the roads
caused?

4. Where on the road should the cyclists ride their bicycles?

5. ‘What should the cyclist do at o ‘Give Way" sign?

& ‘What should the cyclist do whisre there are road signs of ehildreh
or animals?

==
[|

| 7. ‘What is the wark-of the traffic fights in the towns and cities?
8. What should the cyclist do when the traffic lights tum red?
9. Wholshould the eycllst dewher the Traffic lghts turrgreen?:
12 ‘When should the Crelsts do when the fraffic ighfs turm amber?



--- Page 198 ---
(8. writing a summary

| Under the heading Rules for cyclists, write: @ summary of the rules for

cyclists from the: passage yew ave read obove in 12-1 5Tines.
1 thie summary, write about the: following:

| whith people tause many accidents an the reads
- how ihe cyelist should ride the bicycle on the roads

~  fheimpertantthings fhe cyclist must check on the bicycle.
- the froffic lights

- the Himgs thot the cyclist may camry on Thain bicycles.

| C. In this secilon, choose ONLY ONE; either (i) or (EL
(1) Writing of letier
Your eldet brother or sister wito Is working hes tiought a new bicycle
for you as your birthday: present. write o lstier fa tell him/her the
following: oo | | |
«thank him/her for the Best bitthday present ever given to you.
-  howyou use the bicycle and who else uses the bicycle
stow you look after the bicycle, ond where you keep it

« hiow you use the bicycle inorder to avoid accidents.

The-bady of your létier should be In 3:4 paragraphs, in 2-1 5lines

ii) Writing a composiion oo

In 3-4 paragraphs, in 12-15 mes write o compgsifion under the:
heading: A dream thal | had. Ir the composition, write: thie folowing: |
» when you: had that dream, whether the dream was funny, of
| interesting or frightening |
. Where you were, with whi. what you were weaning

. whol was noppening, what you wete doing



--- Page 199 ---
| # Read and speck = !

Read and rece this poem os a class showing acfion,

5 =
i & 11]
; A 3 ;

Physical exercise
And stretch out my arms.
Ther,
1 'wiolk..

[Jame

| skip The rope.
lerouch ond leap like a frag.

| bend my waist up and down.
I do push-ups.

Sometimes, | swim loo.

Ido oll these

When you are fit
physical ‘over-weight muscles OTUs
rugby sicknesses prevents Improves
aclivities



--- Page 200 ---
when you dre fit, you are healthy and strong enough to do ptrysic ul
activities, Some of the physical activifies you can da are: digging.

running or playing foofbdll, Fines does not just happen. It comes
through doing physical exscises. Physical excises dfe activities that
you do using the-argans.or pars-of your body, Some of the srgans you
com Uke to do physical activities are! the arms, the legs, the hards,
the back. the knees and the rhuscies. You feo cankeep yourself it
by playing physical gomes. There are many physics games, such es
taotball, netball, rugby, Tennis. runing, jumping and many othets,

There are mary good reasons why you should exercise: Children who
exercise grow stronger miseles and bofies. Through exercise, yourbody
loses alot of fat. You do not become overweight. Exercising improves
the: movement ol blood in your body. That prevents many sicknesses.
Excralding also improves the way yin book.

Choose The cone] answel

1. Aperson who ists .
A young B. healthy
C. smart D. famous



--- Page 201 ---
2. Having too much weight or too much Heaviness is what we col

A muscles. B. physical
. rnoverrent D. overweight
3. Inorder to lose wéight, one must
A. exerise 5. watch football
C. not exeraise 13. deepal
4. Which one of these 5 a physical activity?
A. Thinking. B. Sleeping.
€. Runring. D. Resfing.
5. This passage shows that physical activities are for =
A, cdutts only B. people of al.ages

8. school children D. spollsmien and spads-women only:

Speak and write BE

Adverbs.

Reod this shor  paragitph cloud:

Runming, ito papular physical activity fof many people. Some people
nun slowly while others choose to mn quickiy. Some run quietly while
ethersrun noisily.

Which gd the words slowly, quickly, guisily. and noisily tell Us? These
worcls are collad adverbs. Adverbs tell us how. Inthis case they tell ¥3
how some people nun. The words in the box below are.all adverbs. Say
thom aloud, comectty.

| heavily wisely ~~ happily ~~ nedlly dally loudly |

Fill in the blank spaces with the right adverbs from the box above.
1. Weal heard what she said because she was speaking _
2. We come To school
3. Throughout the ight, two it wa raining .
4. | goha prize forwriting
5
&

My parents always use thai: money.
The girls were laughing and talk] ng.



--- Page 202 ---
Wilting ¢ paragraph

Under the heading Fitness. wiite 1-2 paragraphs om
= wih itis important tokesp fit

+ the physicdl activities one conde to ke
« the reasons why dhe should exercise.

Using the hyphen {-)

Look of this sentence:
The effiterin-charge 5 o wellknown person.

‘We have put hyphens To join:

= the three words officer/in/charge to-form the long 'wotd officer-in-
charge

+ the two words well/ known to form the long word well-known.
wia Use thie short linecalled o hyphen - for:
(a) joining two wards ar parts of og word,

Rewrite these sentences using ¢@ hyphen for the underfing
thet ey fore one ro

{ Words so

of her fo So out for iota e night jogging on the road,
ove vin ry! ends os out 12d if trie ¢ big city.

i poopie will i ight in self de sfence,
Jt of date is life Hreoteni gq.

Using ne ness Yo form nouns
e.g. Caelessness and azn



--- Page 203 ---
Note:
1. We have added -ness to the odlectives camden and wk to
Form nours.
2. We © plied thie yin lazy with | the added ness tb form Fhe nan.

In the same way, rewrite these sentences comectly by farming nouns
fiom the words inthe rackets:

1. Many people like her because of her {kind} and (friendly).

2. The lerefty) orthe (ugly) of a person isin the heart, not anthe faces,
3. Do youknow that {lenely) con bring {unhopey)?

4, Because of the [dark] we gould notfinish the: (busy) we wanted lo do.
5. Despite his (youthful) his (polite) slike that of afvadull persen.
4, Thelecmergotprizestorher rineci)e and {tharougfi) inherschodlwark.
7. Our teacher does not tolerate {Subba and’ [naughty] anieng.

| the learners.
8 One needs [bold] or {fearless) to fight a lion,

A debate

In two groups. do a debate on thistopic:

Doing sports al school is a waoile of lime: leamiers should vse alt thei
time lo do subjects lke Maths, Languages, Science,

One group ogress with the topic while another group disagrees with it.



--- Page 204 ---
| Whe you cre fil Part 2
energy challenges shength mexathon daiiiinces
| boring endurance firesome

Children who exercise sieep better emi grow well, They ore also able
to handle [fe challenges betier. An example of d life challenge & lack
of transport 1o take you toa place within on area, Someone who has
been exercising carl sasiy walk 1o the place. Anotherchollenge may
be lack of food in the homie. Somecnhe whic has been exercising con
take up piece jobs fo 8am some maney fa buy feveied,

Children who exercike have-endurance: This kb the ability to cémtinue
doing something that is difficult and tiresome. Only fhe people with
endurance are. able to ruhiin ¢ long race called a marathon: With
endurance vou are dhie forwalk long distances, or work hard in the:
garden foro long pefiod.

Thrpugh exercising. children gain strength. Strength isthe enargy to
ds work, to Tift, ta cary of te move something. Children who do not
exercise become weak and have no endurance, They fall asleep
during schoo! lessons. they cannat take pertin games and sports. For
tern, life is boring because they-con not le many things on their own.

Nowadays, there gre some Boys and girls wht spend mast of thelr ime
doing sitting activities. Sifting activities Include weite Hing television. or
plaving video games on the computer or on the deliphane, Lislening
to stories on the radle is:also:a siting gar e. Sitting games are. good,
dt they do ndt build physical fitness. Siting games also do net build
endurance. of strepath, Therefore, we should reduces. the time. we



--- Page 205 ---
spend on siting octivifies. Instead, we should increase the: time for
physical exearcices or autivities, That way we will grow -into strang and
hecithy people with ehdurance:

~ Speak and write [ly |

1, Endurance. is
A. Ihe ability to run fait
B: one of the siting exercises
€. the ability to continue doing something dificult and tiresome
D. afoot game
Z. 2 mdrathon race is ong that's i.
A. long and firesome
B. veryshort
C. run by:children only
D. forpeoplewhe are not fil
3. Without energy, we cannat
A. digin the garden
B. walk or Tun or Jump,

D. do any gl tha lhreelna, 3 and C obave
4. | isthe way we look,

A Appeamnee B. Endurance

TC. Energy [hi Strength

5. Inprder lo goin fitness, skengihr and endurance; ve should,
A. ‘do mare sitting activities
B. not de.any sitting ocfivilies
C. domore. physical activities
0. not do any physical activitizs

Dictionary work

Some Ehgllsh words sound Similar githough they Fide di Heda spellings

and meanings. iri the dicfionary, tha wards are arranged in alphabiétical

order like this with their meanings:

accept... To agree, to take something. for example; The banks stil
accept old coir,



--- Page 206 ---
uxcepl

. ‘Mare than far fin distanc

. Jo age

Used for saying the only Thing, person or tach, for example;
All the boys are present, except Paul. [meuhltg thal Paul &
the only one wha ls not mesent).

es), for example, The mountain k
farther from my home than the fiver. [clue far — farther: to
do with disto reas],

ater level, tor exarnple, [wish go Turthe
Seven in my education. )
The title used before the name of a single

than Grade

y Qf an unmanried

wornan, for example, Miss Shava plans lo getn miared next

esr,

The: title used before the name of & mamed woman, for
example; Mis Shoke and her husband are both {eachers.
‘Making very lithe: ar no noise-at-all, for example, The place

‘vary quiet wharrthe childien have gone ts bed,

Fairly but rot vary, for example, What she told us was nol
uite true. oo | )
Physical activities that people play, for example, A schogl

we do sports an Thurschenys:

Small rmiceks different fresen thie rest, for example, His shirl hod
black spots of the back.

Using the diclonary set

jon above, rewrite these sentences with the

correc word from the brackets.

1. ‘Ourschool does not {except docepl] pupils who ore niet in uniform,

2. Afferteling us the story. she went: [farther further] and showed Us
pictures. |

3. (Miss. Mis) Zano-and her husband got married only [ast yaar,

4. Aftersumsel, itbecame (quiet, quite) dark.

5. Her diets had some black (sports. spots | ot the back.

> Reod and speak

Comparing adjectives
Take tums to read this peem aloud.



--- Page 207 ---
Good, better, bast.
Mever [et irest

Til the good is better,
And the Better s besh.

Mever give up
Every when things Gre bod:
| Not even wher Hingrges Ware,

| Be hoppy with the little: that you have.”

Some. cesple hong less than you have,
Other have the least of all

Even when you areill. fry anid be cheerful.
Remember that some people are worse har Yau,
And that the worst thing ever is only death itself.

Also remigmber;

Tht your meny problems are not-tanmuch frouble:

That some people have mare problems ond rhigre froubl
And that even the most worying problems

Can be solved.

(ii) Using words from the poem above, complate this table by P— in
Fre missing words.

The frst line hos been done for you as an example:
in worse worst
good
[file
many
ruck

Mare: adjeclives
Rewrite these senlences comrecily with the correctiorm of the adjeciives
In brackets.



--- Page 208 ---
This year the formers gota [good] harvest than lis! year
Poor health E one of thi [bad] Things tor anyons.

February is the month of ifie yaar wilh the: ([itfle] number of days.
That cara ecident was the (bad) | had ever seen.
{was Ih when | visited fhe clinic: but there | sow & mon whe was (il)
The cellphone handset was the [good] of all the birhdoy: presents
Igo. Co

7. Alihough many people: in Zimbabwe eat poiaioes, micize meal is
ihe staple food of [hany) of the people.

DALE ool

Ls

The sound of ph

Say this sentence correctly after your tenchern

» 1 anjoy dong physical activities lke running and swimming.

The ph in the word physical has anf sound.
Read the poem below conacily. The ph has the some sound os In

My nephew and |

My nephew Alphonse and 1

Tolk to each otheron the phone.
My nephew Alphonse |
My-nephew Alphonse and |

Onee tock a phatégraph

Of a big elephant
And wen a big fropity
For that elephant photograph.

Reqd the sentences helow commnelly. |

The ph in the words hes the same sound G5 in physical
1. Madam Zulu is 0 physician.

2, Qureouniry is inthe southerm hernispete:

3. |enjoyed reading the biography of the president.



--- Page 209 ---
4. We brogihe the-oir thot is in the atmosphere,
5. When go fo secondary school, | Will study geography.

Willing o'leller
Ir 3-4 paragraphs. in 8-12 ines, wilte a letter to your friend with this
beginning:

Dear

| heard that you carne last again In the running competition. | think it
Is becayse you were not it enough, | just want to tell vou about fitness
and endurance. It:could halp you to win the next race:

Then, In your letier, wile abaul:

~  whal fitness is, and why 5 Important to-stay fit
what your fiend should dg 1h order 1a stay fit
endurance: and: strength,

Spelling and dictation
Your teacher will call out same wards ond one paragraph from the
posse When you are fit: Part 2 while you write therm.

| Rawvision and assessmeen! 146
| -

Read this passage flpemly to the leach. then answer the questions |
thet follow:
Jimi is a well-known amiste at our schol, He & good atsports:

end takes part In sports competitions. Jimmy's father was o famaus
afhiete when he wos young. In his days: Mr Mokonoswon many prizes
Ir -seomirts competitions. Although hieis now old, Mr Makorio still oks
fit. His fines 1 a result ab the physical gxercises hie does everyday.

Around dawn you see hirry with the! the: rising sufy Behind him Jogging



--- Page 210 ---
| along the road. He runs of & fow BUT steady speed: Then-round |

«dusk you see him cgain, thls firmie walking af a steady pace aleng |

the same todd. Thigs af the end of the day before Il gets dark. itis
the time when most people are heading te theirhomes. Like father

{ke S00.

fiom the passage you have read above, unswer fhese questions in

full, contact sentences;
what Is on athlete?

How does Mr Makan keep fit?

‘What isjogglhg?
when i dusk?

nh

WhHo i Mi Makono in the passage ¢ tiover

Listen carelully as the ieachet reads the four words in every numbes.
Which word does not rhyme with fhe rest?

B heat
C. wheat
B. heard: C. Breed

3. A. height 8. night
4 A hedd

| in 2-3 sentences, tell the class about a famous man Of waman you

C. repeat:

D. deteat
D. white |
0, dead

know ot have hedud about. Using suitable adjectives, tell the class: |
- the ngme of iit famous person and where hefshe lives or ved |
« what makes the pefsan well-known or famous. |



--- Page 211 ---
iravelling to far places

listen as your teacher felis you why it is Imporitint fo notify the pecpie
you aie going to visit before you fravel. Co
« The people you want fo visit may be away unless they know that
| « To-enobke fhe people you ore Guing to visit fo say whether ar not
the time of the visit is.gogd to them. if net, to be able lo sugges!
| ‘dnother ime for the visit. -
| - Ta enable the people you are gong to visit to prepare for you things
like food, and bedding,

+ To enable the pecple you are going 1d visit to prepare: what you

| wat from them, for example, money, dotties and help.

= |lis.gued manners to nolify, it is: bad manners fo Just make a vist
without nofifying trie people you are visiting.

 # Read
| Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.
| People on the move!

| | ! frgnsport public aeroplanes private opposite li
destination criminals hifch-hiking  doubls companion
petishabie majority avaliable joumey passenger
windscreen

is L



--- Page 212 ---
In fimbabwe fotday, The rricjotity 0 reveling people Use sublic
freanspaor. Public: trarsport are ths meansofirgnsport that are avald ble
for use by the pubic. These people poy a fae, which & the money
heat en presser anys foro Jeaarey

Some people, howevel, fravel by privals transport, the apipdsite of
prblic transport. THiS iswhen eos travel bry Cis, buses, geroplangss
and any other means Mm remsport thet are not avaiable or used by
tha poblic ingens, A school bus is private rampart becouse is
nob used Dy the pubic, In epee,



--- Page 213 ---
Neways, you seo mny people teh -hHiking, which Is asking for, and
getting free fides when Traveling, Although 71 is fast and cheap. lite
hiking 1s nat dlways the best way of ravelling. Sormie hitchhikers hove
been taken to the wrong destination, Others have been dropped for
before arafter their ciasfinalions,

Hitchhikers must also think of their own safety. There are ihieves and
other criminals fravelling on the reads. Before jumping info g matorcar,
hiteh-hikers must look at the people already Inside if they have doubts
about the people already mside that motor car, they should net get
my 1

Hitchhikers should also avoid nioteor cars with ‘broken windscreens,
old tyres.or drunk drivers. Such motar.cars are likely to break down.on
the way ar be Involved in accidents. Il possible, hitch-hikers should
travel with'a tormpanion'so [bal they con help one anolher Incase
of nead.

When travelling, if 5:wise to dress in layers, or camya jacket. When the
wiather gets too hot, one can always remove the clothes on thie top
layer. [bis alsa wise to camry 8 botlle of dinkirg water ond something
fo eat. Whatever food that you cary should not be perishable. Fruils
stich os bananas: or pranges that do not get bad quickly am best.

& Speak and write E |

From the passage you have (ond above; choose he comet answers
for thie queshions below.
1. What do vou think d ‘companion’ [57

Au A thief,

B. Acrminal,

C. SoMmeEe QrCumpanying you.

BP. A drunk diver.
2. ‘Whalis the opposite of the word private’?

A, safe E fost &. cheap 0. public
3. What is hitch-hiking 2

A. Treveelling in yourown motorcar,

B. Asking for a freedift..

GC. Traveling by pubic remap ott.

0D. Travelling with o companion,



--- Page 214 ---
4. Why do people like to hitch-hike nowadays?

A. There are very few buses:

B. The wealheris uncerdan,

C. Its a fost and cheap.

D. There are crimingls on the1oads.
5. When a food is said fo be ‘perishable’ i oo

A, isvery good to eal B. gets bad quickly

C, Bnoredsy to find 0. does nol get bad ot all
6. Inaijourmney. what do yol think d destinations?

A. Astationwhere the busstops.

B. The place where the journey ends.

C. The plate where tha journey starts;

B.. Aplice at the edge of the read.
7. ‘What do you think ‘dressing in levers’ means?

A. Camying a jocket whenever you fravel. .

B, Removing seme clothes when the weather gefs hot.

C. Pulling on new clothes!

0. Wearing some clothes on top of oihier clothes that you are

already wearing.

3) listen and speak
Using adverbs Co
done, fér example. quickly, neotly; dowdy, carefully. willingly, quietly.
nofslly. peiifely. humiadly, ieavly, proudly. safely, dangerously, roughly,
Make sentences of your own using these adverbs or any others that
end with ly.

5, Listen and write E
Adverbs that do not end with -ly

There are some adverbs thal do not end with ly.
Lister carefully as ane of you reads itis shor passage.

Evéryday..| go to schapl in the moming, I gel upeearty; so | am never
late for tha lessons. While al sehool.. | learn many riew things from my



--- Page 215 ---
4. Why do people lke to hiteh-hike nowadays?
A. Theres org vary fow buses.
5 The wedther is unceriain,
C. Kiso fast ang cheap.
B. There are criminals on the roads.
5. Whenailoodis sald ly be ‘pefishable’ it

—_——f

A. 18 vety'good fo eal B. getst bad quickly
C. isnot exisy tioned B, does not get bod at all

8. Inajoumey, what do you think a desfinotion 57

A. A station where the bus stops.

BE. The ploce where the joumey ends.

C. The place where the journey starts.

D. Aplace af the edge of the road,
7. what do you Jhink ‘dressing | layers means?

Camying alacket whenever you travel,
Removing some clothes when the weather gets hot.
. Pulling an naw clathes.
. Wearing seme clothes on top of olher cibihes that you are
already wedarlng. |

POE 2

& tisten and speak

Using adverbs
Adany adverbs that end with dy tell us how something happens or is
done, for example: quickly, neatly, slowly, carefully; willingly, quietly,
rigidly, politely, humiedly, heavily, proudly, safely, danger GuUsly, roughly,
thoroughly, anly
make sentences of your own using these adverbs ar any thats thal
ard with ly.

Adverbs thet da not end with «ly
There are some adverbs That do not end with ly.

Listen carefully as one of you reads this shor passage.

Everyday. | go lo school In the morning. | get up early, sol am never
late far the Ie legis, white dfsehoel, | learn many new things from ry



--- Page 216 ---
tgacher. When my teacher tells me to do something. | doit at once. |
never chigat or tell Tes: | am ever smart and very obedient. Sometimes
| learn new things feof my fiends. After schoo! [return home. | always
da my homewark before supper. | go te bed soon after supper, lleep
along in my small bed.

Using advarbs that do sot end with ly thal are used in ie poesaye
ahove, answer thete guesiions.

Hew aften does she go to school?

When does she gat up?ls she ever laie for the lessons?
when does she learn new things fram har teacher?
Does ste ever cheat or lig?

When or Frdw often is she smarf?

Hew obedient is she?

‘How often does she lean new: things from her fiends?
when does she retum home?

when does she do har homework?

Tas Lata La

Poss she sleep with anyone in her small bed?



--- Page 217 ---
Complete he sentences below by filling in the most suitable advert:

| immedictely always never  somefimes belo
| soon ater ever while

i. None of these boys aiid girs has: been on a ship.
2. [iis good mannersto knack you open fhe door to come
irsictes.
Thesun  _ risesintheeast and setsin the west,
The wedithet k keeps changing. Ils cold, _ if Is het.
tt started rairiig I'was aslesp.
Inwintes it gefsdark after sunsst,
Peoplemust _ cifnk dirty water.
He eama'in, greeted us and walked out
She goes to bed __ doing her homigwark,

3.
a,
5.
4,
I.
8.
J.

Writing a formal or business leter

There is. a well-known business person in your area who drives fo town
anid back every week, Write a formal letter to the person asking for a
Ift te tow end back: The heading ot the body: of your letter is; ASKING
FOR A LIFT TG TOWN AND BACK.

in your fetes:
Begin: ['am humbly asking fer a lift to town and back.
- when

what you would like to doin town atid how much time it will take
— whether yeu gre fravelihg clone ar with a compxanian, [who
- who you are {toy or gil, age. school, grade. parents, home).
Sayat the end: Thank you in advance: | redlly hepe that you will agree
to gives nie a iff
Remember these:
= a formalfbusiness lstter hos, two addresses, ‘where 10 put fhe
addresses



--- Page 218 ---
write the date

say: Dear Sin {foro man] ar Dedr Madam (fon a woman)
end fike this: Yours falthiully

sery your full iames

leave sume Ines free

write neatly,

D Listen and write E

Spelling and dictailon
Your teacher will call out some words and one paragraph from the story.
Peaple on the move! while yeu write them.

- Speak and write |. )

Using ihe question mark (2)

Read this sentence and then answer the questions that follow:
= Everydoy'we see buses ull of passengen on the roads.
‘What do we see on the roads everyday?

Which buses do you see on the reads in your Home area?
Wha gre the: PUENgETs on these buses?

Where are these passengers on the buses going?

Why cre these passengers travelling?

When will these buses stop travelling?

How often do we see these buses Tull of passengers?

Other questions to answer:

8. Have you youself ever Iravelled by bus?

2. Withwhaom did you fravel?

18. Do you remember the day you ravelled?

11. How much bus fare did you pay?

12. Did you erijoy the ride?

13. Were there many of a few passengers on the bus?

14. Are you likely to fravel by bus again in the near fume?
15. [sit true thal children under five years do net pay bus tore?

Camplefe the sentence below:

Every question beginswitha ___ letterond ends witha _____ miork.
Questions towne:

Imggire thigh you are standing ot g bussiop with other people.

Wiite five questions fhial you would ask the other pecple standing with



--- Page 219 ---
Le ;
iN k

charge of the police |

When peaple need halp, thee go oto the police post,

One-day Mufaro went to the police post where Regina. WwAIEKS:
Regina was talking on the police radio phone. She'was talking about
an accident. The acdident had happened at the intersection of
Lobengula Avenue and Magamba Sireet. A pedestrian had besn

Fead His story and cnswer the questions that fallow.

Mutaro af the police pos
cente ratio Intersection accident avenue
‘unciion sirgight phone flyover injured
lapproaching hooliy excuse

Mufare sperit The |
school hefldoys in
the city. She was
visifirg her elder
sister, Regn.
the tity os a police
oHficer. She works
af a Police Post In:
the: city cenle.
She: is the officer-in-

post. Thepolice post
is avery bust place.



--- Page 220 ---
hit and injured by 4 Cor there, The pedaesitian hod earphones or

headihenes. He could fal hear the heater of [He approaching ear.
ane ofthe police officers said, “That intersection has become a black
spol. Toe many accidents happen thes.”

Just hen an elderdy woman walked in ang went straight to Regina.
She serie], “Excuse me, could you placse tell me the way to the nearest

Fra?

Regina amswersd, "Yes. madam! Go down Tormuka $treel. Go past
the iraffic lights, After the traffic lights you will come te a junclion. at
that Junction, follow the road en your left Until you come 16 a dll, red-
bariczle Balloting. Ther Bank is inside (hat tall building,”

The slderly woman said, “Oh, thank you very much! Good bye.”

Soon offer thal, a man with bis hwo small bays walked into the police
post. The man gsked one of the police officers. "Excuse me; officer! [5
there a.goed park In the city? | wish io. go and sit there for a whille with
my hwo lithe boys? | would love a park with green gross and trees.”

Therofficer answered, “Sure, here isl Go across ihe fist and thessecond
streets, The third street! you will come to is Chitepo Street. Tum right
and walk eastwards along Chitepo Sfreel. The park Is Just after you
aross the milway line, It Is opposite: the fiyaver fo your left.”



--- Page 221 ---
Then, one of the small ‘boys with the man asked, "Did you Just say
opposite The flyover? What ia flyover?"

The police dfficer siviléed of the small boy and Said, "Gand quasiion,
my boy] A fivever Is where one road croses.above o arotfer rood, itis
ke a bridge: A allway line and a road.can also have a tyover."

Answer these questions.

1. What ls a fiyover?

2. When do people in the city go 10 the police past?

3. Where did the accident happen?

4. Whycould the pedestrian not hear the hooter of the approaching
cor?

5. ‘What do you thinks an imtemnssction?

é. What is a place called a block spol?

[D Listen and speak

Cirect speach
1 Twoshort plays ta ach

Play 1

The people: one pretends to be Regina, another p pretends to be the
elderly woman in the story you have read: Regina is standing behind
adesk in he paiice post. The-elderly woman walks straight to her ane
asks what she wantsto know, and Regina: answers; Use exactly the
words they said In the story you read. |
Play 2

Da thie same for the police officer and the man with his two sons. Note
‘that alfniough tHere are now feur people. only three of Them speak.

(M Lock of the way the actual words: spoken by these people are
waitten in the story,
The actual words spoken are written befwean quolation marks.
For sentences we write like this: He said, “My name [s Mutaro.”
Far questions we write like this: She asked, "What isa vover?”
Mote that the actual spoken words S ahve begin with a capital letter.



--- Page 222 ---
Ll Write
Quotation marks
Rewrite the followin

q senignces with quofaBon mdrks. Put c full slon of
the end of evely senience and d question mak af the end. oF & every
quesiion.

1. Mara said tome Esow asnake on thee way
2, Tosked her was it a blg snake

She replied Tt was a vary big snake:

| asked her what did vou do

She answered | just ran: away

IE Write and speak

Lk]

Using quotation marks correctly
Rewrite the following passage pulling commas, quotation marks, full
stops or question marks.

Qne day, after work father ond mather were talking te one another
Father asked mother How was your day today. Mother replied Oh ft
was exciting at the end of day. Fathierasked What rade Tf exciting'at
the end af day, Mather dnsivered we d our Chiistrsis party. There
wee lols of Tool and drinks and pb aoble’ = Were dancing to.the music,
Father said QO | see! You must have: enjoyed yourself very much. Then
mother asked When is your Christmas party Father answered Next
week on Thursday afternoon Mothersaid | hope bwlll be os enjoyable
os Ours i
Afterwards, oct thie play os father and mother talking to one another,
Use their exact words.

r= prepositions
[j Complete these sentences by filling in one missing word In each
blank space.
1. ku ire spent the holidays. te city.
2. Mufaro y wids vETting Regina whe works a police post.
3. While Mufarg ro-was at the palice pest. a pedestrian was hit
a Car.



--- Page 223 ---
4, He was Jit _ the ntersection of Lobengula Avenue ond
Magamba Sires. Co )
5. Then, an elderly womanwalked the police past.
&. A flyover is where. one road Crosses _ another road,
like a bridge:
Read all the words thal you used to fill in the blank spaces, one by one

These words ara called pregosiions. Note that they gre-alwayvs placed.
betore nouns.

Wilting a compostion
Agr whe travelled to: Botswana during the holida clays wrote the following
composition, bul left out all the prepositions.

Write the compasition in full, filbng in the correct prepositions in the
blank spaces:

Use Ihe prepositions to fillin. Some may be used more than once, or
ota BARR. Sear ;

af by for atter from to
| in of On off wilh before
My holiday in Botswaria
During the schaol holidays |rgvelled Botswana. E Botswana is

acauntry the west of 2imbabwe. | ke Botaw ry
because Its warm'weather | fravelled to Botswana — bus,
There ware many offer passengers the same bus withime..
Wa arived in Francistown just sunset. My aunt, Chigo who
WOT: Francistow the bus station to welcome
me, My aunt v aunt works at an orphanage: She looks _ orphans. Aunt

Chipio took me her house. Its ga bighouse mony coms:
The house Is surrounded —_ahigh durtiwall, It wins bat inside Ihe
house. $6 | took my jackat.



--- Page 224 ---
Zimbabwe In many ways. Aunt Chine took me many places.
| enjoyed mast the visit the game reserve. There | saw wild
animals which | had never seen _ . Some animidle like elephants

and buffaloes live groups. |saowd ln running of zebra,

! took photographs the: different animals that | saw: When |

returned Zimbabwe, showed these pictures all my fiends.

Up lo todkry, my fiends still enjoy looking these pictures, one
Qn.

spelling and dictation
Your teacher will call oul some words ond abe paragraph frem Myfare
ai the Police Posi while you write then,

From the twa pictures dbove, answer these quesiions in Tull, correc:

AEtonces;

1. What can you see inthe (&) first picture {i} second picture?

2. Whats the raffic gficer doing. in the (a) first picture [B) second
picture? y

2. Can youimnitate a hraffic officer signalling a ctr to stop.

4. Why do Traffic police officers stop vehicles on the roads?



--- Page 225 ---
5 Do you thinkitls goud for the police to stop motorists on the roads?
& Say one question the frattic officer is likely lo ask the matorist?

Revision and assessment 17

| li Hen carefully as your lecoher tecds this passage aloud

Safety for pedestrions
| Every yeor, many pedestrians are injuesd or killed in traffic accidents.
Perna should weilk:on the right side:ol the road. facing the trafic

Before crossing the road, pedestions must chek for an-coming cars.
When reveling at might pedestrians should put on bright- colored
clothes. or cerry a ficish-light ia morke themselves visible to the matornsls. |
Padastians should Use both their eyes and ears. Far that reason, they:

should not wear earphones or headphones while walking on the
road. Using the cellphone wile at the same Hime walking on thie road
i clangerus,

Answer these o quesiions In full, cotrect sentences:

1. On which side of the road should pedestal ns walk?

2. What should a padesifdn do before crossing a road?

3, Whyshould pedesiiians wear bright clothes when walking oh the
rand af might?

4. bktheswearing of ear-phones som ething safe-to oo when walking
ori the road? Why?

5 Oi which sider of the road de you Think a petson pushing

wheslanaw ara. pada shuld walk? Why?

Take turns to tell the class what pedestrians should do ornot do in
wider to be sate when using the read. Say. it ike this:



--- Page 226 ---
above.



--- Page 227 ---
Children’s rights

What fs a right?
Listers carefully. as your teacher explains what o dght ls: |
A fight is samething thot the law allows you to do, to hove or fareceive. |
For example. You have a right fo choose what you wantto do in life. |
However, what you choose to do must not disturb other people's nights.

Read and learn to recile the following poem about the children's rights.

| Children's rights I
we, the children of Zimbabwe,
Know pur rights:
The right to good care.
The right tofood,
The right to clothes.
The right to d good place to ive in.
The right to. goed health.
The right to speak freely and to be heard.
The right Yo go to school, and
The e fight! to be prafestes, |

I ee |

Fiotecting children

(injury labour abuse vandor adults |
raped SeXUQ al report shepherds plantations
| Servanis guarding relatives


--- Page 228 ---
Protecting children means. preventing pain, injury, suffermg and death
in childfen. This means that no child should be made to suffer in any
Witty,

Every child hos a fight to be protected against :child abuse. Child

abuse is when a child is treated ino bad way. Child abuse can bein

the: form of child labour, like: oo

+ migking children wark in thie mings, or enithe farms and plantations
5.€hild labour

= making children work in the people's homes os house servants;
herd boys or shepherds

- making the children do street jobs such os guarding and clearing
car

= reking. children vendors sealing different small Mings-on the streets

« making the children do hard jobs that are normally done by adults.

Child labours child abuse because these children cannot go toschosol
and leam with other children. Therefora, child latsout is wrong because
tt-goas against the children’s rights:

Children alsa: hdve The Hight to bis profes

Sexual abuse happeris when:

= ihe child is roped, or forced to Have sex

«an adult person touches: or plerys with. the child's private p

= nchild is forced Into mariage, also cdlled chid maricge. Kachrg
girkehifdren ore offen forced 16 mony men who gre &s old as heir
ow fathars

= fhe child Is made to look al sexual pictures. drawings, words;
actions or things,

ted against sexual abuse.

Semedimes children are abused by thelr awn fiends. parents, relatives
or ofher adults. If anyene does: something g that goes aganst thelr ights,
the children themselves must report them at once: Children: can report
to their own parents, to their aurds anid uncles, They can alo report
to their fedchers and headmaster, or 16/1he nurse and fo the police.
Children must not suffer quietly: they must repart!



--- Page 229 ---
. What isarnght?
Whot does protecting the child mean?

1

3. ‘Whig child abuse?
3 oy

5

&

By which peas are tie children sometime abused?
Is child momiage fight-or wong? Why?
To which people can the children reper: whan they:are abused?

Children's rights |
In one full, end comect sentence, fell the class:
«  Bne of your fights asa child

- one example of child abuse that you now know
. one example of ehild sexual abuse you now know.

Using | or me
say these two sentences to the class!

My father and | go to church every week.
‘Stymetiras my father takes me to church in his car,
Note that we use:

+ I when you gre doing I. and
+ mawhenitiédengtoyol.
rewrite the passage below, filling in| ar me.

My friend and |

Jongs and _ are fiends. We play fany games fogether.
Sometimes | fun offer Jonos;-or he runs after _ _. Sometimes longs
ang playwithaball. throw the ball at Jonas and he
throws it back to ____ . Somiefimes Jonas and __ ____ play hide
and seekin the bushes. oo

hide from Jonas or Jengs hides fram |
laok for Kirn, of he lgoks for _______ nine bushes. Jonas arc
play all these games when hes visits: orwhen Visit him.



--- Page 230 ---
Write wo sEftBnCEs with these Beginning:
1. Mybrothergndl__

2. Myfiendand!  __ .

Wrile two sentences with these endings:

3. _ fiybrotherand me.
4 _ —  _myfiendand me.

Wiiling a leffer

In 3-4 paragraptis. in 8-12 lines write a leler fo afi
about the children's fights. In your letter make
must not, should and sheuld net.

anid telling Aimyner
‘wae of these words: must,

Tell the class a little: story about the child abuse thal you once saw or
heard about.

Begin your Uitle story Tike this!

= lonce: sow or | heard that _
End the litte story with these words:

= Thatwas child abuse.



--- Page 231 ---
Read this passage and enewer fe questions that follow,

It wicls & bed day for Thema. First, mother was very orgs with him.
Thema was rushing to thie bathroom. Then, he knocked down the!
tray which mother was camying, breaking all Ine cups on It. Instead
of apologising, Themba said i was oll because of the slippery floor.
This made faiher vary cross.

THemba discovered that his bleycle tyres hod ne pressure. He looked
for the pump but sould not find it. He remembered that he had lent
the pump to a friend. The frisrid had not returned Tt. Thembo had ta
walk all the way 16 school and he was already Behing time.

When THemba aiivéd atschool, the lessens had already begun. The
| 1eaicher was very cross with him, Thembo could rot find his pen. This
made the teacher even more CIe5s with Themba,

| The teccher pulled a cardboard bax full.of lost and found things. He
picked g new pen from the box. Ha asked Themba, "Is this your lost
pen?" Thema answered, “No, srl My penis fot that new. anymore.”

The teacher picked another pen from the ox. This fime [I-was dn
gle and cracked pan. He asad Themba, “Could this pen be yours,
Thambor?" With a smile on his face Themba answered. “Yas, sw! That
old and cracked penisindeed mine.”



--- Page 232 ---
( The teacher looked at Thembg and smiled tos. — had shown |
thot he was honest. The teacher was very pleased with Him. In the:
end. he gave Thembao both his perrand the riew pen, Hongsty pays

In numbers 1-8 choose the answes from the passage you have read
above,
1. Whatdoesit rhean to say: mother was crass?”

As She was ina humy.

Shie was angry.

C. She was pleased.

B. She was moving across.

Mother was Cross with Themba for _

A. rushing fo dhe balhroorn

5 rieiking the floor slippery.

C. leaning the pump fe bis friend

5. breaking the tea-cups

Why did Themba not rida his bicycle to school?

A. He had lotgned it to a fiend who hod net retlrmed it

B, There was No pressure If The tyes;

C.. He wos behind fime,
D. He was samy forbrecking hi his mother's cups.

An honest person

A. speaks softly

B. specks loudly

C. tells the truth

D. doesnot always tell the truth:

How many people were cross with Thembia on this day?
A. Crna. # Two, C. “Three. BE. Four

‘Why could Themba not start the writing exercise with the rest
of the less?

A. Hecould net fing his pen.

B. He was nol there when thie lessons began.

C. He had loaned his pen to a fiend who had nigh returned it.
D. The teacher was even more cross with him.



--- Page 233 ---
Why aid the teachers smile ot Themba at the. end?

A. Themba was going fo do the wiiting exercise with the rest of |
the class. |

. Thiembia had Fourid his lost pen, |

C.. The teacher liked Themba more that any offer child Th the
class.

D0. Themba had shown honesty.

Honesty: preys. This means kit

AL JFyoU are honest, you wil bs rewarded

‘8B. ITs aright even if you are not honest )

C: there are very few people wha are honest

D. if people ore not paid, they wil not be honest

In numbers 9-13 choose the cored) vetb lo complete the sentence.
2. ‘Many children ery sporis,
A. walch B. wolches C. wolching D. watched
10. He asked me, “Where do you from?"
A. come B. comes C. coming D. dame
11.  We'ilood by the side of the rood ¢3 the bus 151
A. drive B. drove C. driving
12. Now my younger brother can read and a
A. writes B, wiohe ZC. writing B

In numbers 13-16 choose the conceal ward lo complete the sentence.
13. The children were taken home by perents.
A, there B. they C. their D. them
14. The people waiting to hops il onglong .
AL B. group C. gueus D0. ‘gathering
15. At hye eng of the div:setison, friare wasngt _  woterleft
in the dam.
A. many B: mweh C. few D. Tots
14. The istered guietly:as the man spoke about the war,
A. Qudience  B. spectators ©. proscengers D. pedestrians

in numbers 17-21 choose the conect prepositions to fill in the gaps,
17, The col was running the rat,
Mo To B. ol C. wiffer DO. ines
18. The goudls Krieg. thee fence imo the garden.
| A. over . through'  C. By B. under



--- Page 234 ---
19. Please remem to switch the lights batare you.qo to]
A up B. off c: for Di of

20. Do not lean he wall that has [ust bes painted.
A. beneath EB. on C. against Ba

21. Nowodays mast peeple lravel oversens ir,

Read this sory and answer the quastions ha! follow,

Baboan and Hippo
For entertainment nowadays, many people just switch an the
television. A long, long time ‘Ggo there was no television. For
entertainment, people listened fo animal stories: In the stories the
animals behaved like people. The animal stories were not for
entertainment only, People leamt many things fromthe storles, This i
the story of Baboon and Hippo. oo oo

‘Bahicon and Hippo wee neighbours: Baboon lived ina grass shelter
on a smal hil close toyo.deep pool of water which was Hippies
hari, Every night Hippo went out fo feed. He loved to sot the glean
medilies, the beans and the pumpkins growing in He farmers’ fixes.
One moming the farmers were folowing Hippie who head aaten their
crops. The fannern were — ————— —
vary angry and they had d
guns to shoot, Fram the
hilltop, Batioon saw the
Tarmers. He knew what
they were up to. He also
BOTW Hippo virig by the
poalside enjoying The
morming  sunshirie. He
Larked a very loud and
long warming to Hippo:



--- Page 235 ---
[ Hippo heord Baboen's warming and dived into the water. He stayed | |
| underthie water unfit the farmers passed the place:

When winter came the wegther became told and windy. Ore night
Baboon made a big fire inside his grass shelter ond fell asleep. While
Baboon sept, ihe fire slowly spread fo the grass roof of his shelter, At
the sme fine Hippo was on his way to 1 He farmers’ fields: He saw |
what was happening ta Baboon's shelter.

Quickly, Hippo filed his big mouth with water and rushed to Boboon's
shelter. When he got there he sprayed theswdater from his mouth ore
thre buming qQrass. of Bakoon's shelter. This: put gut the fire: The noise
awakened Baboon Frm) his deep seep and he sow what had just
hoppened.

Baboon thanked Hippo for saving his fe. Hippo o too thanked Baboon
for having saved his fife earlier of. One good turn desarves another. |

In nue 22.98 choose the correct answer.
22. What do you think entertainment 157.
A. A dangerous thing to do:
B: A very dificult thing to do.
'C. Something you enjpy doing, watching er listening to.
I. Somsthing thot you dislike very meh,
23. In the sores. animals behave like people: This Theans thal in |
those stores gnimals
A. lvainthe forests
B canbe dangerous: to people
= were living with people-a long, long time .ago
DB. talk, work and ves Jide ¢ people
24, What are neighbours?
A. People wha live near one angther
B. People who help one another,
C. Pebple wha live far apart,
nD. People who arg fiiericly fo gach other.



--- Page 236 ---
(25. Why were ihe farmers angry?

33 he people injured in the car accident needed yg

34. | goto ewer for coming fist in the: oc.
A. |

A. They hod: guns:teshoct.
B. Hippo hod eaten hg Lrops.
C. They heard the barking CIES
D. Hippo was: enjoying fhe: moming. ep
26. How did Hippo help Baboon?
A. By barking aloud to wart him,
‘B. By diving into the pool of watet,
C.. By puting out fhe fire that was burming his. grass shelter.
DB. By thanking him for having saved His life earliar on.
27. This story teaches us F
A. pout the people's: enteriainment
E. thafwe should noi sleep inroams willy a buming fire
C. ‘to help one aneihier in fines of need
0. ollthe free Nn A. Band € above
28. Which of these is-anather suitable heading. of this story?
A, Onegood tum deserves anather,
8. How the farther killed a Hippo.
€. Buming grass.
B. Winter and the cold weather.

In numbers 29-32 choose the mest suite
blanks,

dle adjective to fill in the

29. Something thet is not ecsyto do is

_ AL unsafe: B. difficult C. private D. untrue
30. Somebody who swellknownis _ FF
A. kind B. famous Cc. proud LL. important
. Apierson who never stops taking 1s. .
A. Noisy B: loud C. quick D, talkative

Choose the word that hos the same megning os the undetlined
ward. |

32. Simone Cigarettes ik dengerous fo your Health.

A. healthy B, harmiul C. enjovatile D. iri
A, ful B., kind Cc. Quick D. Sow

gitt BE. prism C. D. present



--- Page 237 ---
Roe this nassagn ant answer the questions that fallow.

Roasting meat

Rotisting meat is cooking the meal iy Reafing it dirsetly. feat cari
ber roasted in an ovan or an a burning fire. Boosting rect requires
special skills. It is an art. Not many: people have the art of roasting
meat propery,

One day | was. watching my naphew. Orish, roasting meat. Orlisi had
collected enough firewood. The firewood was from dry branches of
hergiwood frees such os hgpana, ook and mise, He would never
use pieces of painted timber or gummed poles, The smoke of the
paint and ails would speil the taste of the meat. It could even make
the meat unsafe for eating.

Orllsl arranged the filmwood Ind nedt pile and fit the fire. While the
fire wes, burning, Oisi was-culling the meat into thin slices. They had
to be thin slices. Thin shces allow the heat rom the fir fo gat to every.
pert:ot the: rat, After thot Onlisi sprinkled a litle salt over the slices.
He then added a bit of pepper to make the reat tasty.

Meanwhile, the logs offirewood were still Duming withred ficmes, Crlisi
waited patiently until the fire fitmes died down completely, leaving
only the hot, rel charcoals.



--- Page 238 ---
Thien, Orlisi spread THe slices of meg on cleaned metal frames sitting
over fhe hit, red charcoals. The slices of meat mus! not touch or
fall ente the charcoals. That would makes the-meat dirty. Dirty misat
Is.unfit or unpleasant for eating. Using d long fork, Orlisi then kept
turnitig the slices of reat aver dnd over. Inthe and Both sides of the: |
slices got roasted tharoughty.

With time. the: slices of meat tumed Juicy ond brawnkh in colour.
Lrlisi:pulled o piece of meat from one of the sices and fasted it.
He noaded his head. It was'd sign that the meal was tharoughly
roasted, That was also sign to call me. his uncle. to the feast, Up:
to this dary, | have: not come aeress anyone better at roasting meat

than my nephew, Orlisi.

In numbers 35-37 choose the correct answers from the passage you
have read chove.
35. WH wrote this shor? oo

A oy A n 3 pha, eZ. lis | i uncle.

BG, B. Someonewe to not know:

36. What isan arf?

A: Anactivity that requires special skills;

8. Avery easy thing fo do.

C. Something that is done ky young people only.

D. Avery difficult thing te do.
87. Which of the following Is good For roasting mek?

A. Nol lo use painted places of firber os frewaod.

B. Not to humy when roosting meal.

C. Netto let the meat touch or fall onthe red fire chore

BD: All'the threein A. Band C above,

Replace the underlined words in the following senfence with a suitable
meat than my nephew, Orlis.
Ai learned B. thanked Comet D. fought
39. In the'word fiend, which leeris giant?

QCToss anyone better af roasting

= —_— eee


--- Page 239 ---
——

(40. Which of fhese sentences is written correctly?

A. Mother asked, 15 Tuesday today?

B. mother asked Is It Tuesday today,

C. Mother dsked, “Is it Tuesday today?
0. mother asked is it tuesday tacityT.

me: 1hour 45 minuies

mm

Read the passage boiow and answer the questions that lofow,
Derik was 0 bachelor, or an adull nan who has pot ya! married.
He lived oll by himself. Ore day Derik decided fo rove! far fo logk |
for a good woman to mary. There, he met Nerissa wha was very
good looking. Nerssa ws single. When Denik iolked lo Nerissd, he.
got disappointed. Nerissa had jest all her front teeth. This made her
look vety ugly whenever she sled or talked.

Derik eft this district guickly and went to a nearby city. There he met
pretty Marigold, whe was also single. Derik went up Merigold to
| tak to her. When Deik gol closer to Marigold, he saw that she ws
téiller than Him, Derrlkdid not want ta many 6 woman taller than him.

He was very disappointed.

a —s



--- Page 240 ---
(Later, Derik met Viola, asingle gil who was workin gin akitchen. Viol )

had: goed [ooks. Derik though! he. had found the right waman te.
many. He went up 1a her and they: greeted ona -anather by shaking
hands: Viela's hands-were very rough. Derk wanted a wile with soft
hands. Again, he felt disappointed.

Derik was about fo return home emply-honded when he mel o
pastor or priest of the local church, He told the pastor his story and
is. dissppolntments. The pastorsaid to Him, "Son, you are’ looking for
the wrong thing, There is no perfect person on earth. Besides, beauty
is not on the face of a person, True beauty B In the haart."

Deiiik got the postor™s message clearly. He realized his mistake. He
remembered: Serna. a hardworking and very hariest gil whe grew
up with fim. Shewas stillsingle. Denk was sure fal Serna would be
a good wite, He humerd back home. Netlong after, Derik grid Serna
became husband and wife.

fi} Conmipiohinsion
From the passage that you have read above, answes hese questions
comechy.
| what i is a bachelor?
 Demik ved ol by himself. What do The words "all by himself"
mean irr fhis story ?
What LAL A Bemik when he faked fo Nenisa?
Why eid Derik not fike to marry Marigold?
Why did Berk fof ike to mary Viela?
What db the words empty-Hdnded meanin tis story?
Derik realised his mistaie. Whial was Deirik's Imisfte?
What does fhe word single mean fn this story
Why wis Derik sure thet Serine woh feo a Hod i mother fo his
~ chigren? CT |
It. Where did the pastor say was the frie beauty of a person?

(ii) SUTTTTIAn
In12-14 fines write oc summery of the passage you have road above.
Biggin your surfimary like tis:
Once upon a time there wos.
In thes summon; say something about:
= how Derk ved
+ His fravels



--- Page 241 ---
Section 8 a
in this section, choose ONLY ONE question: 1.or 2. Da nol answer
beth,

I 1.  Afesmal letter
wien you gol off the bus an which you had travelled, you left your |

satchel on that bus.
lh 4 - 5 paragraphs, write a formal letter to the manager of the Bus
Company asking him/her to help you 10 find thal satchel.

mR fates say:

— you were on the bus travellng from ___ _ 0 [wher
day. time): Co

- where you were sitting en the bus lfronl/back/middle Irightitefd
seal)
wheré you got off the bus

what you left ehind when you got off the bus

- how the satchal looks [new /foldi colour/size) and what I insicle

. what you would lke thes anager to-do with the satchel hel
shies firicds it.

2. A compaesition
In 4-5 paragraphs, in 1013 lines write a composition glx

ut a stary

that teaches frida about life. Give your story a good |

heading.

After the heading, begin your campaosition lke this:
Onceyponatime _ on
This is crshory of _ oo or
Along fimesage _ _ ee —,

Then in the story, say:
- what happened, wher, whan, how. fo whom
whaotit iepches the people.



--- Page 242 ---
Other Grade 4 Learner's books available

[ ] i
Soin si RE E— | ere
‘Science and Technology Mictiemifics. | | cites

ore pone
Warn sm PY boven

“Farnily, Refighen and’
oral Edugofion

os ES
Wi praLiram Primary of
- [] i LL Iter -_—

Honig e-Soc xl Stutics:

t i Pike it

Err frm vib wigan

j i
p- [LIF Jn i
Weiner Friary



--- Page 243 ---
Ventures Primary
English
Grade

Vertures Primary bnglsh becomes Book Grade-£ has been developed fo suppart thee
content, aims and ohioc tvs confoined in the Mew Primary Education Sumo tum for

“Zliks bas, 11 eseonteniti ell hes tae breihicss IMeal [he disearmdars tieed toy comer thc Coeglishs
Lemiggranmge Sylleabais for Groce: 4

The book fetus:
Level appropriate [angunge and vocatuliiy.

= |Fitegratiin of English Lo ngage with athe subjects,

= Variation in concept oul and ilkaling appreetehes m eater for individual lsorring
pralatericos aiid abies,

= Andee disc iflivary appredch to tho keri ext Er Listy Langlie.

= A pelioralshe ef lTlook.

= Cwlourtol level-opproprials flustrations that are supplementary to the content ond
concept they intend te cover

= rnchosion of various: longuagn stnectures. com positions and phanics:

= rw Irtierns |Meat car kere ly gaspaliairiesd- baa Testes cats exssicarmencnt

= Arefles on of madam ideo,

= These of ICT toads in facilitating amd leaiming,



