--- Page 1 ---
— =~ an
se

— GA|coltege press

Ventures Primary

Heritage-Social Studies

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primary

Heritage-Social Studies
Learner’s Book Grade



--- Page 3 ---
Topic 1

Topic 2

Topic 3

Topic 4

Topic 5

Identity: Family histo
lA. Role and status of famiy mena OPO Rete ee econ eenencesenesesesseseetesnsseesunenes 1
1B. Family aspirations... CTS ssssecssessesssecssesssesssecsscssscssusesesasecesestans 2
Ic. Family gatherings SNA NR Raa caa nace CELE 3
i incigenous processing OOS wo rieatntonnreerc nn 7
FINES AN Trot eer iesseretteetiiinsnssonseeeeennnnnnaneeceesanie
SUMMON creer ements reeeeeaeeseeeesesecesesesensesssuessssessesssesaearsueaesesess S
‘End of topic assessment test. ee neneeeeeennnnnnnenannanssssnecacaaseenenneneeneee , 0
GIOSSAY ose eeeeccceseeesssseeecctnnecttettcecc ce eetennnnnnentennrsennseneessneesieces 11
Cultural ETH GS oon. ecccssssssssucessusesssesestubscsssscsssseccesecceseeceseecceccecccceccccececess 12
2A. Family ceremonies CIN HitUAs 0... eesessesscesesscescsesescsvecessssscseesscevaces 13
2B. Customs of different cultural QLOUDS .o.ecccsssscscsscssscssetesccscsecescececeeeeeseeeess 16
2C. Indigenous medicines and related cultural practices seceseeeeseceseseeeeess 18
2D. Children's QaMe...eeeccccccccccocececcoeeses stenccasesacaceshbedassbocessedesequsceensceenecassocees 20
SUIMIMOTY.....esesessesssesessssussecosssssssucssscsucsussussesssssvssesscssessussussresseesesussussasstssstsessessees 20
End Of topic Assessment teSt.......cccccscescsscecsccsssscsessssscecscecssesssssecesseseecseesesesescees 2)
GIOSSOLY ......ccsssessccccscescsscscsscssescssscsscscscscescscsesecessesssssscsersacsssasseaesacseaesscacseaseaeacs 22
National history, sovereignty and governance ssssuusesesesssuscessssssusesssssssssesesee 23
3A. . The early people Of ZIMDADWE....... cc cescssesssssesnessesseeseseececeeeteneeeneeseees 24
3B. Contribution of the early people to the Zimbabwean heritage ....... 32
3C. The need for rules ANC IAWS....cecc.eeeeeeeeeseeseeeseeeeeseeeeees essseeeenn cssseeeensnaes 33
3D. Observing the laws: The role of individuals, community, police and
TNE COUNTS ......:.cssssscssssesssscccceseccccecccscsccccescccescececcceceecceeecueeeeessssseeescesseuseeeeas 35
3E. Development of Indigenous JOWS ....seeeceseeeeeeeees sgensvassaesborsndenbisesapbengansoes 38
ZF. National SCHOO! PICUGE ........ cc cceeeeesecessslavsscesseseeseeesseeseesseesseensessesaeseeses 39
SUIMIMANY as esssscsecececcececsvesesseesensenesnecscseeseensencneesssneseessesssesssseenensensnensneebesesnsenesass 40
End of topic ASsessMent teSt.....ecsecsecessesseestssesssesesnesnesnensesneeesseeneenennessneseneee 4]
GIOSSOIY cossesesecseessssseeseceseesseessessusessassnessscsssssascosecnsessnensesnncnuesennegnenssannaconnegnintte 4
End of term 1 assessment.......... fiSdeebasvensuies nssbatecaseccotscensocnsesssnesenteiisnssassuentenees 4
Entitlements/rights and responsibiities... hdaditiabsnasesnonensiisscdies¥Uipecniesaéavecneessrense 48
4A. Children's rights/entitlements.................4 sinesestachatdecysdebescteadcadesessasseserees : ;
AB. __ Child protection seaeeeees daaceceessceessessvsessesscescscessese daccceceecesescecsanscenceeseneeerres? 3
AC. Substance CIDUSEC .....cccecccccceesssssssceccsccsscscssscssseccensecccccaceecenscscsncesenerersesere”® 24
4D. Rules and laws that protect children from aibuse —ccccuceusenansedsnsetrnsnes
SUIMIMIATY -snsssssvsessserennsetesetcsssseeennetbbenesennnsnnncnssssnasnnsneseessenansnnseser pg
End of topic assessment test...........4 sesesneecnnngnbenenengegecrenssnsnneres TTT 5h
» GIOSSOTY uesecessseceseesreceeeeqeecsesssereneoes eolabsesencsssciiaaeessedguctacsensssesesesssrrteene
: BP aaaenenees 57
Shelter PPITITITTTITTiT it Cevccvecccccces Pooeccvanccccccrcces ae 57
5A. Indigenous forms of fhelen on 59
5B. Shelter in other countries .............. lr@debeseessseaneneeeeet™ eee

\

Scanned by CamScanner

-_———


--- Page 4 ---
pessadssfecessdnabssuscsacdies 60
, HeItEL .-sreerererer o ored S cescessssseteseseasseasssenes 6]
5C. Materials used to make s raphical areas....
5D. Types of shelter according to ge09 ccuaueneaanenssssisedeeeeReAeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeceney i
SUIMIMIOTY....cssccesssseseseesvereeeeeens eee nn ceuananeansesenesstetHteeseUeeeeStee set OCA gests 63
End Of 1opic ASSESSMENT 1ESt ne neni enn sae
LOSSY werner : - cepenosscsnsnscsssssseesseessseoees 64
Topic 6 Social services and volunteerisean.ssecereensrreeer" conn nie cerenivsssiiee 64
So Ronee ot ecal Social Service OVI worse never 67
Beene er eed eee er eee critstnnueneseneitgeviavereteenrerees 69
SUMIMATY wessssssssssessssieenee aSebenenseos seeds ae saveesanieoe 69
End of topic assessment testa..sscusemsenserssereerrnessnnre nny TT 70
GIOSSOIY 0... seceesssesssseseescecesessceesanssncsesaceeseessessnesaeaner® . is
i 00
Topic 7 Natural Heritage: Production, distribution and consumption o' 9 ee 7
abs delta eer agre poe eon anu e -
7A. Conservation‘of natural resources rsesenntieerneneenemnseezicnestecrere a4
Ze. Indigenous methods of manufacturing OOS w-----serrerrrrrsrereeee 7
FO LRG OF INGUSTHES pansentsrnsrentrernnennntievnrntnieennionneeesee a
7D, BOMter TAG. ..seesssessssescneecnsecssecseesnessesssecensscesessstecseeneseaeensaserereneseeeeesees oi
Summaty.......... becanntucsacntonsssenssoencacnacaconsnestenenesantnenestapsssenscenacesenesesssousecescesanscseass a1
End of topic CSSESSIMENE TOS... eeeesssesecesseeenseeessssendenecesegeceteeeetssaneeeseaseseeeees 32
Glossary .......... Teeeeeenecesssesesanssesessesceessceeceessnssereesssereseseceeccesereeanesseseseanessonsceeeeceeens
End of term 2 assessment beneseuens seotperentetseneeengeeeenees srotegeegrereerettesess 88
Topic 8 Transport and COMMUNICATION veessessscsssssssssccsssssseessssssssssssssssssucsoseeccoeseeseecsccca, 86
8A. The increasing need for TONSPDOMT.... ss eescseiecsessssssessecsesreesscecseseeeeeceseess, 87
8B. Major roads and rails IN ZIMDPADWE waeeseeeeeeeccecceseeee dessevee sbdedaneveedevegeossaes 89
8C. Public and private forms of transport and communication............... 90
8D. Road SCTCHY oossssssesesseesnssesinesstnseeeessessnssseeeesvessenssseey sesesesceccesesenciescsces 93
SUMIMATY,....ccessssssessscsecsssescerseececs stteebasesececenssestasscersssassecanceseess tanvesetensstensnenancens 95
End of topic assessment TEST... scicecnsedecsceslesesseseeteces. ee a ee 95
GIOSSOIY ....sessssssssesssceessssesssssssssvecsssesseasseen serttsgeesseesaeesesaeesessessseasatssssstarecesesseses, 96
Topic 9 Work and leisure ....sss.esssssseeSesstsssenectcsuneecesec...
"ttt eeeteeeceeeeeeseresssessssstesesessees 97
9A. Reasons FOF WOTK.sssstrtsetseestretsstnietticruntinnc 97
28. Sport and arts as a FOr OF WOKKveccsncc ttttttserse 99
9C. Visual and performing arts as a form Of leisure... ste 100
7D. Responsible use of leisure time........... ssapinniteeeebecstertinsy 1
SUMMANY -ssssssseecsseessssssseseees ttt eset eeteesenesteesssesstecees a aati 02
End of topic assessment test... bebe Cent PANNE iaiaaeetrre 103
Glossary vettssetttleessesssatetecssssstesssssealesescouil, sence ttt tettenseencsnnsnnte 104
; | (accu taanecnnetttestictitenness 105
Topic 10 Global issues... seeteseseaees . c
10A. Environmental conservation... Oecccceccces ote ewe ceccecseccces 106
SUMMATY esseseee vsettteestntestestingee mtn setts, 106
End of fopic assessment fog nen 112
Glossary ee ttt tee eteeadessetccsteenneec eters M2
End of year assessment Lr nee ] 13
Pret sattctsttaseattininnec an 114

ocanned by Vamocanner


--- Page 5 ---
Identity: Family history and local heritage

Objectives

You should be able to:

explain roles and status of family members
outline individual and family aspirations
identify family gatherings

describe family gatherings ..-

identify indigenous processing tools |
display indigenous précessing tools
identify local shrines and monuments
describe local shrines and monuments.

PO NAAR WH =

Flashback

a. Collect pictures of five animals and say the totems they stand for.
b. Say the purposes of a totem to family members.
c. Draw and name some indigenous hunting tools.

MY Keywords.
mM cultural valles guardian, = shrine == dehusk
= aspirotions ¢ ~ -monument. status

=

Introduction

The family is the first p
These are usually based on cultura

j ny belongs. Cultural va 7 we
We fculor OUP or people. For example, in Indigenous Religion

X€ . Children belong to

ider even when they are wrong

reed te treat their elders with respect because of the status they cor ding to the
Neeson family or society. Family roles are share

someone’s position ina

lace where children are taught family values and practices
| values and practices of the communlly

. ific to a
liefs and a way of life spe¢!
lues are belie Y ‘tig taboo to talk

families and they

status of family. members.

ocanned by Camocanner


--- Page 6 ---
°

TA. Role and status of family members
| 150 $¢ sretetetetstetleceees
C6 2505 Melos S55 S55
O—N SRR Os
C4
6 x ene, arctetatotatateteens ‘
Netsty’ CLONAL N ONE,

ef

Roles of family members

Families help each other with different chores. Children help their parents with
different chores. Parents teach their children how to do some duties. Parents who
work with their children pass on particular skills and values to them. Such children
learn the important virtues of life from childhood. Some of these are hard work,
trust, love for work, humility, sympathy and respect. .- : :

Through these virtues of life a child learns to respect family members according to
their status. A child with good personality (Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu) respects the
status of family members and values family roles. He or she shares these roles fairly
with other family members according to their status. Families work as a team to
make their home happy by keeping it clean and producing enough food. These
virtues of life in the end become their family heritage. It makes their family different

from others. \
Families are made up of adults and children. Fathers, mothers and guardians hold
a high status as they are elders. A guardian is an elder who looks after a child who
is not his or hers biologically. A guardian can be an aunt, uncle, grandfather or
grandmother fo the child. Everyone in‘a family has a status attached to him or her.
It is important to know the status of every individual so as to treat them the right
way. Children also have'q status attached to them, they are to be taken care
hemselves, The status children hold gives

of because they cannot take care of t
them certain ahs: 1 oP a right to a home, family, education and birth

certificate. ARB

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 7 ---
Activity 1

1. Discuss the roles of parents or guardians and children in the family.
2. Act out the roles and status of family members.

Exercise 1

1. Everyone in a family has a ,

A. bed B. cup C. status D. book
2. Families help each other with different .

A. food B. chores C. plates D. statuses
3. The status children hold gives them certain ,

A. gifts B. tasks C. rights D. homes

4. What is the role of a child in a family?
9. Achild with a good personality values
6. A guardian is .

1B. Family aspirations J

Each person has a mixture of strengths, needs and aspirations. Aspirations are the
things a person wants to achieve in order to enjoy a good life. some examples ol
strengths are good health, good education, skills, courage, discipline and har
work. Individuals within a family have different aspirations. Some aspire to be
farmers or singers. Others only want to earn enough money to take care or their
loved ones. Families also have their own aspirations and these could include eng
a religious family, to be respectable in the community, earning enough money to
survive and having a warm, loving and peaceful home. Family aspirations are
things a family wants to achieve in order to enjoy their lives.

6

>

Tembo homestead \_ on
embo- is in Esigodini. It i . It shows many family

bo homestead is in Esigodiri. It is a beautiful home.
aepirations which the family has achieved. There is a promising maize crop and a

vegetable garden: They keep cattle, goats and chickens. One of their aspirations,
as shown by these projects, is food securily.

/
4
* |

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 8 ---
Tembo > homestead
Food security in the home allows the family to enjoy the
A balanced diet |
Good health

Safe water supply
Money (from the sales of eggs, milk, vegetables etc)

Happiness
Respect (from the community).

following daily needs:

Activity 2

1. Write down other common family aspirations.

2. What are your aspirations as an individual?

Exercise 2

are the things a person wants t in ore

living. n_wanis to achieve in order to enjoy good
A. Strengths B. Values } ¢ ae |

2. Individuals within a family have » esthation D. Weaknesses
A. the same B. different C. sith
Give an example of a family's daily needs. ifficult
What are family aspirations?

Give one examp'e of an aspiration.

One Family aspiration achieved by the Tembe some _
‘ stead is

D. achievable

NOE

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 9 ---
Family members place great value on family gatherings. Family gatherings:

e bring together people of the same clan

e strengthen family relationships

e help children understand the family tree

¢ help members understand each other according to their status

¢ help relatives to rejoice together
helo families to solve family problems together.

Families gather for different occasions. These include weddings, funerals,
celebrations and rituals. Families help each other in providing food, money and
services for gatherings. When there’is death in a family, in Indigenous Religion.
people gather at the deceased's house to mourn’ them. The extended family
members also go to supportthe family. Some help with cooking and serving food

\

whilst the others sing songs to comfort the family. °
A year after the death of a family member, the family celebrates the life of the
deceased and do a ritual called umbuyiso/kurova guva. The family sings the

whole night and in the morning brewed traditional beer is taken 1° the grave of

e

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 10 ---
mbuyiso/bira, a branch

the dead. In some of the indigenous customs, during Y the dead relative back

from the grave is taken home as a sign or way of bringing
home.

ther taken to a traditional
When a member of the family is not well, they are Se ok They come up with
healer, hospital ora church. Families gather to support the ther in everything, be it
Means of taking care of the sick. Families support each o

funerals, births, weddings or sickness.

Activity 3

i ise. what
1. In groups, discuss the following family gatherings. Dramatise part of
happen | ..

Family gatherings bring together people of the same

A. clan , B. surname ©. age group D. totem
2. Family members place great value on :

A. family:deaths ©. B. food. — a

C.men °. D: family gatherings a

3. When families gather, they help each other with
A. flowers and water B. food and services
(Co. crying’ sD, cooking ak
Give one advantage of.family gatherings. ss,
Family gatherings strengthen family. Oe ,
In Indigenous Religion, Kurova.guva/umbuyiso is.done after how long?

a de

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 11 ---
1D. Indigenous processing tools

There are different types of indigenous tools that are used to carry out different
tasks. A tool is something you use to do work. Some of the basic indigenous tools
are still being used today. Below are three examples of indigenous processing

tools.

a) Grinding stone (guyo/imbokodo)

A grinding stone is used for grinding grains into mealie meal.
It is also Used to tum nuts into peanut butter. It was Used by *
the early people of Zimbabwe. Some people still use it for
turning groundnuts into peanut butter. Grinding stone

b) Mortar and pestle (Dur nemutswi/Ingiga
lomgigo)

The mortar and pestle has been used by people for years.
It is Used to process food into a fine paste or powder. For
example, it is used to crush groundnuts into peanut butter. It
is also used to shell nuts by pounding and to dehusk corn. To”
dehusk i Is to remove the outer F covering. Mortar and pestle

c) Furnace (mvuto/umvutho)
A furnace is for smelting iron. The picture shows a furnace
used by the early people of Zimbabwe.

Furnace

Activity 4 |
Visit the local community and do the following: |
a) collect samples of indigenous processing tools. 4

b) take pictures for display in the classroom
c) practise using indigenous tools to “Process sqmne materials.

\ I

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 12 ---
What is a tool?

A shrine is a place of worship
associated with a sacred
person or object. It can also
be a tomb of a saint or other
holy person. It can also be
a place that is visited and
honoured for its association
with a famous person or
event. Examples of local
shrines are the National
Heroes Acre in ‘Harare and
Njelele in Matobo. Nijelele is a
sacred hill where Indigenous
people perform rain makin

ceremonies. |

a °

Great Zimbabwe

VVUAHIIGU VY VAlMIVUALITIGI

A grinding stone is used 1o___—_—s sorghum. "ind D. peal
A. crush B. change C. 9g ;
2. Sorghum is processed into _ __ meal ‘let D. maize
A. sorghum B. rapoko ~ and
, actle j ize into _ — ;
3. The mortar and pesile is used fo turn Ma 3. meal and maize

A. groundnuts and powder
C. mealie-meal and samp

4,
5S. What is the use of a blast furnace?
6. Draw and label a grinding stone.

D. millet and rapoko

ww

Heroes Acre

aA , A monument isa structure, building or site
at | that is of historical importance orinterest. It is
gm usually owned by the community as a whole.

Examples of national monuments include
1 the Great Zimbabwe Ruins in Masvingo,
: Matobo Hills in Matobo and the Khamii ruins
In Bulawayo, The Matobo hills show they
were inhabited by the early people of the

eg COUNTY. There are caves with rock paint
" paintings
gj that depict the people's way of life. °



--- Page 13 ---
Activity 5

Carry out educational trips (tours) in your local area and identify:
a. caves

b. sacred hills and mountains

c. shrines

d. rock paintings.

Discuss the local shrines and monuments in your area.

In groups of two, collect pictures of local shrines and monuments and create
a small gallery in your classroom.

Using the internet, find out about other sacred places in Zimbabwe.

Exercise 5

Where do we find rock paintings in Matobo?
What is a monument?

What is a shine?

Give one example of a monument.
Give one example of ashrine.
What do people do at Njelele?

Summary

Scanned by CamScanner

Family roles are shared according to the status of family members.
Children learn good moral standards and develop good attitudes from their

parents.
A person or family with good moral standards and good value standards

develops good attitudes and aspirations.

A child with a good personality (Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhvu) respects the status
of family members and values family roles.

Family gatherings bring together people of the same clan.

Three examples of indigenous processing tools are grinding stone (guyo/
imbokodo), mortar and pestle (duri nemutswi/ingiga lomgigo) and furnace

(mvuto/umvutho). 7 vn
Shrines and monuments are a very important heritage to us.


--- Page 14 ---
_ Give two ex
- Great Zimba

AWN

| End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions
. Every child has a right to

A. have brothers B. belong toa family
C. belong to an orphanage D. be noisy
. A family is part of a .
A. School B. company C. community  D. person

. Morals deal with good and bad
A. habits and behavior eyesight and behavior
C. voices and habits people
Indigenous processing tools make processing work ____-

“O@

A. difficult and slower B. easier and faster
C. tiresome D. heavy
. Guyo/imbokodo is used to process rapoko/millet into________-
A. metal . B. mealie-meal  C. seed D. basket
. Achild who values family roles .
A. talks of child labour B. does not do her/his duties
C. does his/her roles well D. complains about work
. What do you call your father’s father?
A. uncle B.. grandfather C. grandmother D. nephew
. Family aspirations help the family members to .
A. become lazy B. work hard
C. enjoy basic needs | D. be healthy

. Family gatherings may helo some members:

A. to change their values and attitudes .
B. to eat a lot of food during gatherings”
C. to hate each other. — :
D. to drink and quarrel:

10. A grinding stone is: used to mealies.

A. crush .  B, change é. peal D. grind

Structured questions

What do the following words mean?’
a) Monument a yo :
b) Shrine 3

Aspirations o 7 | 4
c) ASP amples of oka shrines. )

bwe is in which province? (1)
find rock paintings i in Matobo? (1)

e do you Il
Wher 5 why family gatherings are important. (2)

Give two reason

scanned by Camscanner



--- Page 15 ---
. What do you call the following people?
a) your mother's brother

b) your father's father (2)
7. Name one gathering that brings families together. (1)
8. Give one example of an indigenous processing tool (1)
9. A blast furnace is used to__. (1)
10. The other indigenous name for ‘umbuyiso’ is _. (1)

Total [25]

Glossary

Attitude the way you think or feel about somebody or something

Clan group of related people

Morals habits and ideas on what is right and what is wrong

Perception the way you see or think about a person or thing

Value the importance.or usefulness which a person or thing has to
you

Virtues are good things, for example, respect for elders, being
hardworking and punctuality.

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 16 ---
Cultural heritage

Objectives

You should be able to:

list the family ceremonies and rituals

explain some of the family ceremonies and rituals

identify some customs of different cultural groups

describe some customs of different cultural groups

list some indigenous medicines

describe how some indigenous medicines are used

identify some cultural practices

demonstrate some cultural practices

explain the importance of conserving medicinal herbs and trees
. State some children’s games that cultivate norms and values
. play some games that instill norms and values.

ISM RN TRONS

— oO

Flash back.

1. What is friendship?
2. In groups, talk about the different kinds of friends.
3. Talk about the family ceremonies and rituals you know.

Key words

dowry adolescence ethnic group

RG eee EE AO

Introduction

Zimbabwe is a multi-cultural society. Families from different ethnic groups hold |
different ceremonies and rituals for happy and sad occasions. Examples of theses |
are birth, marriage, adolescence, bira/ukuthethela and kurova guva/ umbuyiso.
The ceremonies and rituals are held in different places to mark the occasion or @
event that is being celebrated. The different cultures in Zimbabwe use different |
indigenous medicines to cure a number of diseq 4

in the form of herbs, for example, the Ndebe

stomach problems. This ee 10oks at family ceremonies and rituals, customs of |
different ethnic groups. INalgenous medicines, related cultural practices and |

children’s games. — ©

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 17 ---
2A. Family ceremonies and rituals

The Shona use thatched huts to do their ceremonies and rituals. Inside the huts is
a built-in slab (chikuva) where tney carry out their ceremonies or place the dead
before burial.On the other side is another slab where men sit (chigoravakwati).
Other tribes, like the Ndebele, do their ceremonies in different places like the
cattle kraal, hearth (emsamo) and mountains. Different rituals and ceremonies

have different places and areas where they are performed and celebrated.

a) Birth

Indigenous people celebrate the birth
of a new born baby in different ways.
In some Shona cultures, when a baby
is born, the first is ululation. This is a way
of celebrating the new member of a
family. In some indigenous cultures,
people congratulate the couple and
can only see the baby after three 4
months. Close family members can see
the baby earlier. They bring gifts for the |@
child and its parents. Ke

b) Marriage

Marriage in Indigenous
Religion brings together
two families. Families come
together to support the
two people who want to Yaa
get married. The groom
pays lobola (bride price)
to the bride's family before
they are married. The
groom's family sends
people to pay the bride
price at the bride’shome.
Close family members of
the bride helo with

cooking and taking care
of the groom's family during the lobola negotiations. The bride'sil

prepare kitchen utensils for her to take to her new home. The
een’ on how to be a good wife and daughter-in-law bef
usband. OMe

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 18 ---
However, in some cultures the bride brings dowry from her family to her husb

when they get married. Dowry is money or property brought by a woman wn
she marries her husband. Nowadays, most indigenous people pay lobolg
then get married in a church or court. This is done to celebrate with friend, th
coming together of two families. .

c) Adolescence

During the development of a child there is a period before adulthood known
as adolescence. This period has three stages: early adolescence, middie
. adolescence and late adolescence. Early adolescence is the puberty stage
when a child shows physical changes. The girls will be between 10 years and 14
‘years. They develop breasts and begin to menstruate. The boys will be between
the ages of 12 years and 16 years. The boys develop deeper voices and begin to
look like men. Middle adolescence is between the ages 15 years and 17 years,
This stage is past puberty. Late adolescence is the final stage of adolescence. Itis

between 18 years and 21 years.

Boys at initiation

+ i brate adolescence in different | Wal
indigo ole ne Xhosa copie in MbembesiandvaRembain Mey men
tures, forexamMP f they are taken to the bush by the chosen) © Wom
when boy. During this period, they are circumcised ar \y_ during winter. In some
for amonin. © pected of them. This is done, especially. to bath in e Iv
men and who : es when girls come Of age mney ST et where chosen ele
ing. After that, they are taken 1 5 clean.
ombout womanhood and how to keep themselves ~coming ©
men f milies choose to have ceremonies to ce
WO a

te the c°
ach lebra
initiator children: @
age 9

Scanned by CamScanner

nt ways. In some


--- Page 19 ---
After burial

After the funeral the relatives share
the property of the deceased,
Usually, close family members get
ashare. Aflersharing the property
of the deceased, the widow is
asked to choose aman from the
man's relatives (kugara nhaka).
IN case of the man losing his wife,
the wife's relatives are asked to
give the man a wife (Chigadza
mapfihwa/Umlamu).

A year after the death of a
person, in Indigenous Religion,
the relatives gather and brew
beer. The relatives spend the
whole night chanting anasinging ae ,

member their departed —=sseieieess dand
one. Early the following morning they take the beer to the ann ofthe ave This is
do their rituals. They return home together to the hut they Mi vafumbuyiso).
done to return the spirit of the dead to their home (kurova gu

In groups, act out the following weddings:

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 20 ---
; ; wes CAINCH Te Ee ES ISTE dur
— family ceremon Uring
2. In pairs. identify SUCH
gatherings. et, research aboul ceremonies and riluails of differen ath

Using the interne :
. orOuPs. Present your findings in class

Exercise 1
Which two changes take place in girls during puberty

A. Deep voice and menstruation. B. Menstruation and Masculinity
C. Menstruation and growing breasts. D. Look like men and grow a beg
2. The people share clothes of the deceased the day after burial. rc.
A. Xhosa B. Pedi C. Shona D. White
What is ululation?

The Ndebele perform rain making ceremonies

When does a child start to show physical changes?

During initiation, boys are

2B. Customs of different cultural groups

Ceen ethnic groups in Zimbabwe observe and practise different customs. An
er nic group is a community made Up of people who share the same cultural
ground. People of different ethnic groups behave in different wcys wh
ney eee wey of behavior makes up the groups’ norms and values the
an ebele boys crouch whilst girls kneel when the Ik wi el
| r y talk with the elde
eneraly: spon women either bend their knees (kutyora muzura/ukuvivocuy s
Ae eeee a hands to welcome people. The men remove the'r hats and cro ich,
to greet people women also bend their knees or kneel (ukuguqa/kuofi yma}
epends on the setting. If it is at home they Lneel spesrellie
hese-gestures are also taught to learners in

on the road, they bend their knee:
7 nees. T
schools. When ivi wate

ne CelViNg gifts on prize giving days, girls bend their knees Gnd boys

bow. See the pictures below,

SH barry
pp
inp

1.

NAR

es yet te


--- Page 21 ---
The shona follow a hierarchy of leadership when addressing the elders (kusumana/
ukubikq). For example, when a married woman dies, her husband sends delegates
with money to her family to announce her death. These delegates can choose
one person to hand over a token, in the form of money, to her parents. The picture
that follows shows the chosen gentleman (could be a nephew from the husband's
side of the family) handing over money to the late woman's father.

Activity 2
1. Talk about the customs in your culture.

2. Discuss the customs of different indigenous groups.
3. Role play the following customs and say when and why they are done:

e crouching

e kneeling
e bending knees (Ukuviyoca

/kutyora muzura).

Exercise 2

When accepting
What do the elde

What is kusumana/ukubika? .
When are children supposed to bend their knees around elders?

Why are learners taught these customs at school?

Boys crouch, girls ?

a parcel or present, girls bend their knees as a sign of
rs use to talk to the spirits?

ROARWN>

@

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 22 ---
i) Indigenous medicines and cultural practices

When we are sick we need medicine to make us well. Th ici

| , . IN@ medicine used
people that they get from local herbs and medicinal trees are called indienne
medicines. The roots, stalks, leaves, fruit and flowers of herbs are used to prepare

medicines. Below is a table showing indigenous medicines and what they treat.

_ Stomach‘ache, heat rub

M Uroro
Aloe

Source

Mugodo/ hardwood a0
Mubvamaropa/blood wood “|B

Theme:

ST SS Des ee

ee . 4
On EL

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 23 ---
Mubvamaropa

) = za Flowers
Mupiuta PPT SUI pees ; Chipande
carr : . eaves
Umvagazi and Umthunduluka Bark leave)
aden MMunduluka Bark, leaves/seeds
Inyathela

Back ache/ coughs
Blood pressure”
Whole plant Stomach ache

Roots “Gough EF LIE

ii) Conservation of medicinal herbs and trees

indigenous peane medicines made from plants. To conserve medicinal herbs, the

th ee would use part of the plant instead of the whole. For example.

i the part that is needed are the roots of a plant or tree, a person would cut one OF
two roots from the plant but leave it still healthy and in the ground. This means that
next time they want to use the roots they would still have a plant to get them from.
Indigenous people would also plant herbs in place of the ones they would have
used. When a tree bark is needed, people would take the bark from the tree and
not cut down the whole tree. This is done so as to conserve the tree for future use.
In some cases, if the leaves and roots of a tree or plant can be used to cure the
same thing, then the leaves will be used instead of the roots. This is done to make
sure that the plants are still there for the next generations.

Activity 3
1. Use the internet to find out about other medicinal herbs and trees.
2. In groups, collect samples of herbs and medicinal trees for your herbal

garden.
Talk about how some herbs are used and what they cure.

Treatment
Cough |
Stomach ache, heat rub

ocanned by Camocanner


--- Page 24 ---
2D. Children’s games

The picture shows different childrens
games. These are nhodo/igwini,
tsoro/inisoro and pada. These
games train you to be sociable and
improve mind and body fitness.
Some children's games cultivate
norms and values. They teach
honesty and oneness. Games like
ingwini/nhodo teach you how to
judge your options. Such games
teach you to think outside the box
and help you with problem solving
Skills. Nhodo/Igwini also teaches you
hand and eye coordination.

Children’s games

Activity 4

1. Name the different indigenous games you know.
2. Which games teach you how tO Count?
3. Play the above games with your friend.

Exercise 4

1. State two things ,
2. What skills do yo oY eam from playing games.

Ef from playing ;
Give one example vf: Playing INfSOro/tsoro? -

e . .
4. Games Cultivate of Indigenous games, ~

. ’ a
5. Children * 8OMes train then ODS
e

Summary
° Zimbabwe has m

ceremonies for Citfere oanic grou
* Indigenous MEdicines CAsions

os OF

° To conserve MEdicing hergeSCted from differe t

instead of the whole, *: INdigenoys 5 NW herbs and Medicinal trees.
* Games train children tob Op!e would USE part of the plant

m ,
Prove Mind and body fitness.

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 25 ---
End of topic assessment test }

Multiple choice questions

|. Zimbabweisa___s society.

A. multi-cultural B. colourful C. beautiful D. Shona
2. Njeleleisfoundin_ ss P

A. Chinhoyi B. Matobo C. Kwekwe D. Harare
3. Name the place used by the Ndebele for rain making ceremonies.

A. Matobo Hills B. Victoria Falls C. Njelele D. Kariba
4. Money or property brought by a woman when she marries her husband

iscalled__.

A. lobola B. roora C. gift D. dowry
5. What is the first thing Shona women do when a baby is born?

A. Ululation B. Dancing C. Crying D. Laughing
6. Marriage in Indigenous Religion brings together two aoe

A. people B. religions C. families D. cultures
7. When girls give adults food they :

A. kneel B. stand

C. put their left hand on the waist C. look away
8. Boys from different indigenous cultures whilst girls kneel.

A. stand B. clap their hands

C. sit D. crouch
9. Muroro roots are used to treat '

A. acough B. stomach ache

C. skin cancer ‘D. blood-pressure
10.lsinaga roots are used to cure a

A. cough B. chipande

C. stomach ache D. skin cancer

Structured questions

1. Whatis the role played by families during lobola negotiations? [1]
2. Define the following terms:

a) dowry

b) lobola

c) status [3]
3. Families help each other with different ___. (1]

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 26 ---
4. Name the instrument below.

[1]
. Who shows their respect by kneeling? [1]
- Which game teaches children problem solving skills? [1]
Plants that are used as medicines are called eat (1]
List three indigenous children's games. , [3]
Give 3 examples of indigenous trees that can be used as medicine. [3]
Total [25]

CON AW

Glossary

Customs: — way of doing things.

Indigenous: — plants, people or animals growing or living for a very long
time.

Muiti-cuttural: — made up of people of different ways of living and religion.

Rituals: — Events done regularly and always in the same manner.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 27 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:

narrate the history of the early people of Zimbabwe
describe the way of life of the Khoisan and the Bantu people
explain the contribution of the Bantu to the national heritage
explain the need for rules and laws at home, school and in the community
compare by-laws and national laws
outline the need to observe laws
identify some of the laws of Zimbabwe
identify indigenous laws
state the people who preside over different indigenous courts
. recite the national school pledge
. explain the importance of the national school pledge.

I.
2.
3.
4.
S.
6.
7.
8.
.
]

]

Flashback

National Aen: apa celebrations pagar US Ly! as Tim @
us that we are one people.

are important.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 28 ---
Key words

heritage — customs by-laws whistle-blowers
Khoikhoi

innocent

Introduction

Every nation has its own history, heritage and customs. Heritage iS what WE get
from our past and also pass on to future generations. It involves material things,
knowledge, culture and customs. Customs are a way Of life of a group of People,
Zimbabwe has a rich national heritage that includes AMAZING fOCk Paintin S
imposing buildings such as the Great Zimbabwe monuments In Masvingo; tradition
like lobola and belief in the existence of a Creator and life after death.

7
‘

S

3A. The early people of Zimbabwe

The early people of Zimbabwe were the Khoisan and Bantu. ‘Khoi

Used to describe the San and the Khoi-khoi. These where hunter-gatherers and
herders.

san’ is a term

i) The San

Key

| Botswana

z Kalahari desert
ae Namibia
“= South Africa
ae Zimbabwe

Map Showing the kgalagadi deser}

The San are sometimes called the Bushmen, They were the first known people
to live in Zimbabwe and other countries 4 ambia, Malawi
Mozambique. They are believed to be the ancestors Of most of
live in Zimbabwe and our neighbouring Sountries. Today, the Sa
live in the Kalahari Desert of Botswang an : }

map shows the Kalahari Desert.

, Botswana and

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 29 ---
San Family

The San were light brown in
complexion. They had small bodj
but they were strong and able to
deal with difficult situations thes
language had many clicks ‘Man (i
languages that are spoken in f
Southen Africa today have clickin r
sound. Examples of these ongoaues
are Ndebele, Xhosa, Zulu, Khoisan
and Tswana. The picture shows a
San family.

A San family

Clothing

The San wore light and loose-fitting clothing so as to move about easily. Men wore
animal skins that covered their bodies below their waist. The skin in front was shorter
than the skin behind. Women wore short skins in front which were tied at the waist.
The San used skin blankets to keep themselves warm. Both men and women wore
many small attractive things made from seeds, shells and small pieces of wood
strung together as necklaces or bracelets.

Shelter

The San lived in small family groups. They did not build permanent homes because
they did not stay in one place for a long time. They were nomads. The San lived
in natural caves or in areas with rocks. They also made grass shelters. They had
different places for making fire, putting rubbish, cooking and sleeping. The San
were a united people who hunted, lived and ate together. They were clever and

hardworking people.

Activity 1

In groups, research about the way of life of the Khoisan. Present your findings

in class.

Find out the local names for the animal skins that covered the lower bodies

of the San. ;
In groups, find pictures of the San on the internet or in books and magazines

and talk about their way of life as shown in the pictures.

ocanned by Camoscanner


--- Page 30 ---
oe at they got from the wild animals that they hunted. The meat was
ae, Be ca tats or smoked and dried te as to preserve it. ay: Hetris Still dry
their meat to preserve it over a long period. Dried meat has Its oa iP ie
names like chimukuyu and umhwabha. The San also ate bulbs, roots, frui S, berries
and weeds. In some areas they also ate fish and shellfish that they caught in rivers.
Basket traps made of reeds were used for catching fish.

Work and leisure

The San men were excellent hunters. They knew the habits of the animals they
hunted. The men hunted in groups. They would chatter with each other quite a lot
but would follow an animal without being seen or heard. They used sign language
to communicate once they saw an animal or when they picked Up its spoor. The
San were very clever hunters. They came up with many different hunting methods.
For example, they trapped animals by digging deep pits which they covered with
wood and grass. They dipped their hunting arrows in the poison. They got poison
from roots, barks, berries, snakes and insects such as spiders and scorpions. They
hunted small wild animals and reptiles like lizards.

San rock paintings

The San were creative artists who
Painted on rocks and cave walls.
They made paints ofmany colours.
These paints have been there for
thousands of years. They also cut
pictures into the hard surfaces of
ostrich eggshells, The San painted
pictures of themselves and of
animals. They also. drew Pictures
of hunters running after game. The
San also used wood for making
pegs, bows and arrows.

The San rock Paintings are ve

important. They have given, ws
a lot of information abbey, the
way they lived. These eqn be

| 9€ found j
example, some rock Paintings din caves or on ro

ore found in Matobo Hi
The San women made net Ags foPeares © Mills, Matob
from reed fiber. They Used Ostia, _ -Sving food Using leather

a i vegetables.

San rock paintings

Cks around Zimbabwe. For
: O.

4

and string bags
Carry and store

i CamScanner


--- Page 31 ---
The San were very o . os
TY JOod musicians. They were good singers and dancers too.

Dancing was their favourite pastime. They danced to enjoy themselves. They also
danced during important gatherings.

Activity 2

. Discuss the different methods of
a) meat
b) leaf vegetables
C) milk.

. Can you think of signs that we sometimes use when we communicate?
. Why do you think the San used sign language when they spotted an animal?
- INgroups, talk about the different places in Zimbabwe with San Rock paintings.

preserving the following food:

ii) The Khoi Khoi

Some early people kept cattle and other domestic animals like goats and dogs.
These were called Khoisan herders or Khoi Khoi. Unlike the San, the Knoi Khoi moved
in fairly large groups of about two hundred each. Like the San, they used wooden
digging sticks. Their bags and other tools were similar too.

Shelter

Khoi Khoi shelter

The Khoi Khoi built dome-shaped huts from tree branches. They covered these with
either reed mats or animal skins. The huts were arranged in q circle. The animals
were kraaled overnight within the village circle.

The Khoi Khoi's main activity was the keeping of domestic animalslike cattle, goats
and sheep. The animals were kept for their meat and milk :


--- Page 32 ---
The cattle were very important to the Khoi Khoi. Those with large herd

were considered rich and were respected In their ee oa 25. ThE Khoj Khioj
moved from place to place looking for grass and water for ok animals A- time
went on, the Khoi Khoi began to grow crops. Like the San, both men ane w men

worked together.

Khoi Khoi women made a lot of pots to keep and carry milk. They Also got salt fre,
salty springs. The salty water was evaporated in soapstone dishes. The we men
milked cows and goats and also gathered roots and berries.

Social customs and religious beliefs

Khoi Khoi marriages were arranged by the parents. The Khoi Khoi helc special
functions for young people to prepare them for the future as husbands ci | Wives,
Marriage could only take place after these ceremonies were held. The y UNG
man paid lobola (roora) and brought an ox for the wedding feast. After marriage
the new couple had a hut built for them near the wife’s mother's hut.

The Khoi Khoi, like the San, also sang, danced and told stories. They had a special
interest in the moon. When the moon was near and when it was full, they had lively

dances. Like the San, the Khoi Khoi also believed in God and in spirits. Their God
was called Tsuigoab.

Activity 3
|. Find out about bride price in

2. In groups, talk about the simi
and the San.

your culture. Present your findings in class?
larities and differences between the Khoi Khoi

Exercise ]

Besides being good hunters, what else w

The Khoi Khoi Gog idk echnc €re the San good at?



--- Page 33 ---
iii) The Bantu

Central and Southern Africa

Way of life

The tribe, clan and family were all important parts of the Bantu. These tied the
members together. All members of a clan were somehow related. The clan had
the same clan name which was offen that of an animal. Each member was
expected to show kindness to other members. Marriage between members of the
same clan was generally not allowed.

The Bantu were farmers. They would grow their crops on a piece of land but would
leave that land after a few years to look for a new one. The men would clear the
new land by cutting down trees and burning the grass. The women usually made
the land ready for the growing of crops. Each family would call in helpers and give
them food and some drink. The Bantu grew maize, millet and sorghum. In some
tribes, for example, the Tonga, both men and women smoked clay pipes.

Food and food storage

The grain that the Bantu grew was made into flour by stamping with a pestle and
mortar (duri nemutswi/ngiga lomgigo). They could also grind it between stones. A
stiff porridge was made using the flour and eaten with meat or vegetable relish.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 34 ---
Cattle, goats and sheep were usually killed 10! spec ] a Ail Many fornili
also kept birds like chickens. The Bantu used herbs co vA neti Hs aa DUSh to Make
their food tastier. They ate wild game, pumpkins, groundnuts, sweet Potatoes
beans and cucumbers.

Food was kept in pots or baskets. Grain was stored in‘ special huts which Were
raised on stones or posts to keep small insects and animals that damage foog
away. Special types of food like locusts, caterpillars and sweet potatoes Were
sometimes hung on trees to keep them safe.

Clothes and personal beauty

Many Bantu tribes wore only a small piece of bark cloth or skin. However q few
tribes, including the lla in the Zambezi Valley, wore no clothes at all. The Banty
gave a lot of attention to the way they looked. For example, special hairstyles ang
tattoo marks were common. Some tribes removed one of the sharp teeth at the
front of the mouth and others made holes in theirear lobes (ukuklekla among the
Ndebele) and put in large ornaments.

Shelter

The Bantu built huts with walls made of poles plastered with clay and roofs thatched
with grass. Most tribes built round huts. They were often surrounded by a strong
fence made of reeds. These fences gave shade and privacy.

Work and leisure

it was the work of the men to make weapons and other tools. Some men were
very good at making things Using iron. Some tribes like the Venda were good at
iron work. They made hoes, hatchets, assegais, knives and arrow heads.

Bantu men built the outside of the
huts and also did the thatching.
The women used Clay to cover
the walls. They made Clay floors
and sometimes put COw-dung
on them to keep qway pests.
The women also made pots and
dishes of different sizes. These Pots
and dishes were used for holding
relish, making beer, Cooking
porridge, storing food or Carryin
water. Each pot had a speciaq| use
and had its own name.

Iron work

Aa

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 35 ---
eine: San and the Khoi Khoi, the Bantu en
ah S Usually happened in the evening. Th
i €d drums, mbira and pipes. Women c
ney ate separately from them.

joyed singing and dancing. These
ey played musical instruments that
ould drink beer with men although

Marriage customs

Th '
és ier oe sibilant the ' lobola” marriage custom. The husband-to-be gave
He lator’: “as e fo his father-in-law. This meant that the children belonged fo
EG tons a. set group. However, if the wife was treated badly by her husband
Pe occrat ob a he husband would lose both his wife and the lobola cattle. The
ould only get his lobola cattle back if the wife is at fault. In all fribes, a
man could have more than one wife at the same time. Wives and children were a
source of wealth and were also helpful when one got old. Aman with many wives
and many children was greatly respected. Chiefs and headmen often had more
than one wife.

Religious beliefs and practices

Like the San and the Khoi Khoi, the Bantu also believed in a creator god. The
Creator was called by different names like “Mwani" “UNkulunkulu" and "“Mulungu”.
They also believed in spirits (midzimu/amadlozi).

The Bantu had a knowledge of herbs and medicines. The doctor or herbalist kept
this knowledge to himself or herself. They got this knowledge from their parents

and other elders.

Names of God (in different languages)

ENGLISH

Activity 4 | os , ott

1. In groups, talk about the lives of the Bantu and the Khoisan.: rch the ir
for pictures and present infront of the class. ah

2. The table below shows the different names for God in ofiou ang
you add some more? . oe

(j

ne

&
x
Ss.

Scanned by CamScanner —


--- Page 36 ---
1. How did early people preserve their meat?

A. They never ate meat. B, They dried it.

C. They ate it, D. They refrigerated it.
2. The San hunted reptiles. An example of a reptile |s a ne 5
A. baboon B. buck C. lizard . dog

3. What name is given to a person who treats the sick with herbal medicine?
A. Herbalist B. Doctor

C. God D. Witchdoctor
4. ‘Mulungu’ is Chewa for ,

A. the Creator B. lobola

C. cattle D. the Almighty
Ss. Aman with many wives is called a__
6... and___ often had more than one wife.

3B. Contribution of the early people fo the

Zimbabwean heritage

The early people have contributed a number of things to the Zimbabwean

heritage. The following is a list of their contributions and how they helped us.

¢ The San's rock paintings and other Bantu artefacts are an important source of

our history. —

The early people's knowledge of colour and art has improved our own.

Heritage sites like the Great Zimbabwe monuments.

Our knowledge of edible fruits.

A rich history of music and musical instruments. F

(xylophone) has been there in Bantu Africa for tho

« The custom of paying lobola is still practised in m
is meant to strengthen marriages.

¢ Knowledge of traditional medicine continu

« Knowledge of herbs and herbal medicine
source of knowledge. We can also get kno

* Knowledge Of a Creator god.

or example, the Marimba
usands of years.

any African societies today. It
es fo help us even today,

show that books are not the only
wledge from our elders.

ocanneda by VLamocanner


--- Page 37 ---
Scanned by CamScanner

3C. The need for rules and laws

What ;
Lieidigaoe happen if everyone was left to do what he or she felt like doing? Why
> we need rules at home, at school and in the community?

Rules at home

Rules at home are usually not
written down. Each family member
gets to know and _ understand
family rules. Home rules are not
always the same. They may differ
from one home to the other and
from one culture to another.
if home rules are followed, life
becomes orderly and happier.
The picture shows an example of
home rules. In this case, the family
does not eat without praying first.

Rules at school

Like homes, schools have rules that hav
However, school rules are 0
or they may be for the who
learning becomes easier, m

e to be observed for the good of everyone.
ften written down. They may be for a particular class
le school. If school rules are followed, teaching and
ore interesting and more useful.

In pairs, do the following:
Give examples of class rules.
List examples of school rules.

e Who makes these rules?
* Do you think these rules are important?

Rules in the community
Our homes and schools are part of the community. Our communities also have
rules that need to be followed for the good of every membel. Community rules
are not usually written down but people get to know them Community rules are
not the same everywhere but they serve more or less the same PUIPOS
help its members live harmoniously.

e, that is, to


--- Page 38 ---
Local government by-laws

Councils have the right to make by-laws. A by wis Laas
that works only in that area. Local government! by a

Central Government through the Parent Ministry. In Zimbat . _
councils fall under the Ministry of Local Government. Loc: 7 so ane
may differ from one council to another. The laws are for the good of a

living in those areas.

Examples of urban council by-laws

Some urban by-laws are there to take care of the environment. These are called
Environmental by-laws. For example, it is not allowed to grow crops less than 30
metres away from streams and rivers. It is also not allowed fo grow crops on land
that is not meant for farming. The cutting down of trees and bushes is not permitted.
There are also Trading, Marketing and Health by-laws. For example, people who
sell things in the streets.are required to have valld licences. Vendors or hawkers are
not allowed to sell things everywhere. They are restricted to certain areas. Lastly,
we have traffic by-laws that control the movement of traffic. Vehicle owners are
required to park their cars in parking bays. If they do not do this, their vehicles may
be clamped or towed away. They'will have to pay a fine to have their vehicles
back.- .

Parliamentary and the country’s laws

- Thos ra
Members of the National Assemb ke who sit

Of the people. The areas that they



--- Page 39 ---
The Parliament mates
ve Rill ua makes laws that govern the cc
ows ta te tection oiallicitizane ana
and follow the laws. The Country's re ee
the behaviour of ql bodies from pele
: 25

The laws that Parliament
People are expected to respect
found ina constitution. These govern
fe Companies and councils. :

ice a al el

1. Find out who your local MP js.
2. IN groups, outline ry}

€S and laws
3. With your friend, ta] ae

ome, school and community.
k about the Imp

ortance of laws.

Exercise 3

. Give examples of two school rules.
. Define the following words:
a) law
b) by-law
. lf you cultivate on river banks, you will have broken which by-law?
. Why are vendors not allowed to sell their products on street pavements?

3D. Observing the laws: The role of individuals,
community, police and the courts

If the doctor gives a patient a prescription but the patient chooses to keep the
prescription and does not buy and take the required medicine, his or her illness will
not go away. In fact, the sick person may, get worse or even die! Likewise, if laws
are made but they are not observed and enforced, they become useless.

i) Role of individuals

7 Eto. ing the laws. If everyone follows the law,
E zen has a part to play in observing ry
ert tae would ae to jail. The police, the courts and the prisons and correctional
services are there because we do not always obey the law. There is therefore. the
need to punish and correct law-breakers.

The most important duty. of every individual is to respect the law. National laws
and local government by-laws have to be followed for the good of everyone.
Individuals are expected to, do the following: crime.
* Cooperate ite together) with the police to prevent and er...
For example, they can be whistle-blowers. A whistle-blower is 5°
reports dishonest or illegal activities to those in authority.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 40 ---
eanegpwean lawn,
e Resp oan i MN yO .
No one has aright to kill yernment. For example, governmer "
tand support : Nee ity. , ple, government wo; ers mus!
: NOL nee governmen ‘pror ty like vehicles or demand bribes fron: clien|
seeking government servi nd

e Observe and respect ne le)

«Pay taxes so that the go" nme

andeducation.
« Respect national leaders. ee it

a |
'

li) Role of the comm

Communities are made
cooperate with the gover
need to take good car
stream bank cultivation a
vegetation and animals

follow the advice that they
heads and chiefs. They
workers that operate in
and Extension officers. C

of in lividiuals. Like individuals, communities must
t by following the laws. For instance, communities
f the environment. They can do this by avoiding
sareless cutting down of trees. Veld fires destroy

community leaders like councillors, village
ect and follow the advice of governmen|
ities like nurses and Agricultural Research
ould support government programmes |ike

mass immunis hey sI o send their children, both boys and girls,
school. Communities can also help the government and themselves by forming
Neighbourhor 1 committees so as to reduce crime. Communities can heir
reduce or prevent rin ig Vety watchful. Suspected cases of theft must
be immediately reported Oli ‘M

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 41 ---
‘olice are there prima;

igating crime rick ca ans '0 keep public law and order. They do this by

falls under the Minis: ©s!INg law breakers. The Zimbabwe Republic Police

mmissioner — Genera! 4 of Home Affairs. The police force is headed by the
Helping to Bontrot O' Police. Some duties of the police include:

} Brotectin road traffic and making sure that road rules are obeyed.

| 9 the public fro

Ba — robbers. M criminals such as thieves, murderers, rapists and
_ Mounting roadblocks toc

~ and speeding - all of rears i ee on a overloading
_ * Helping schoo! children to cross b aise ae
trailing the si Foss busy roads safely.
" Sy as be i streets and villages in order to prevent trouble or crime. The
Mes: asain “San UsiNg vehicles, bicycles, motorcycles, horses or on foot.
7 : : e ims of road traffic accidents by, for example, taking the particulars
a CeO people, taking dead bodies to the mortuary and advising and
informing their next of kin (closest relatives).
Training members of Neighborhood Watch committees.
\dvising and educating the public on crime prevention and the dangers of
omestic violence and drug abuse.
/e warnings to the people advising them to be aware of dangerous criminals
armed robbers that may be moving about committing crime.
ping to keep order at large gatherings like football matches and state
casions like Independence Day celebrations.
elping people to find their relatives.
g directions especially in towns and cities. It is wise to ask for directions
the police. Strangers can-mislead and rob you!

yrts are there to guard the Constitution (the supreme law of the land) and
ce the laws of the state. The Zimbabwean courts fall under the Ministry of
°, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

ther things, the courts do the following:
ret (explain the meaning of) the law to protect innocent individuals.
ide whether accused persons are guilty or innocent.

h law breakers by imposing fines or sentencing them to jail.

| 7

ae

dramatise a court session. — : eg.
educational tour to observe a Court session.

)
a r ia)
i 3 =
}
47 ne al
j va
i Se ee rv |
~ ae 1
ns i
ar

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 42 ---
- State one right of any yee

- The role of the Police Is To __—- : " .
Every citizen has a part to play In observing i ay can einer poy ¢

_ When a person is found guilty of breaking a law, ear pc

or they may be sentenced to :

_ Give one role for each of the following:
a) communities

b) individuals.

3E. Development of indigenous laws

i) Village Court

When people started tolive togetherin groups they neededsomeone tolead ther,
settling disputes. This ledto the rise of different courts andoneofthemisthe village cou;
The village court is led by the Headman in a community. One gets the headmar
title as an inherited position. This court is held after the family court has faile:

BRWNhH —

nn

ii) Chief's court

The Chief's court is the F
of advisors who help hi Urts. The chi =e
; ; “ec ef 1
it the right to hear all IssUes qn ) S of the chief's Couto vo
and headman's court. The Chief's court Gly. It is above the family cour"

Chief's area and not outside, JUdge or hear issues only in the

~~. by CamScanner 7



--- Page 43 ---
1. In pairs, find out about the people who lead different indigenous courts. |
2. Look for pictures of people who lead indigenous courts and present your
findings to the class.

3. IN pairs, research about indigenous laws.

. The Chief's court is above the Family court. (True/False)
. The Chief's court can judge issues from other areas. (True/False)

. Give one reason that led to the creation of indigenous courts.

. Of all the traditional courts, which one holds a higher position?

. The village court is held by the ina community.

. The chief has a panel of who help him in settling disputes.

AnRWD —

The National School Pledge is meant to promote a sense of belonging, love and

respect for our country's heritage. It encourages all Zimbabwea"s to work hard
for the good of the country. The pledge reminds us of the selflessness Of the mer

and women who lost their lives in the fight for our liberation and independence.
\ ys

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 44 ---
|
The National School Pledge (Junior Schoo

With your books closed, recite the National School Pledge

i 7)
. What is the name of the Supreme Law of Zimbabwe
nd Ndebele names for the Liberation War?
tre pe doe chee __ and the dignity of hard work

. The pledge encourages us to commit to ail
State one thing the National School Pledge is meant to promote.

According to the National School Pledge, in whose hands does our future lic
Selfless people like the men and women who died in the fight for our liberatic

cared about other people: s and more than their own

Rok wWwhry —

Summary | ,
The San were Phe first known people to ive’ in Cenira
eople who led organised lives and u

land Southern Africa. |} Ve)
ised their natural resourc e

ana and other languages spoken in Southern Africc:

light « se to enable ern tO move about easily.
e¢ The cei peoph ew how ‘to pieseive, their food, for example, they smokec

? a and in the community.
ritten down.

¢ Rules may or
le q ior ine good of all the people.

e {tis everyone's c
e Rules may differ:

ered by Urban Od Rural District Councils
¢ Urban and rural COUN tthe Mini
© Councils have a right} Stry of Loca! Government.

the Central Government : ment of the whole country).

Scanned by CamScanner

1 common Purpose, that is, to serve

enforce laws, They get their authority from


--- Page 45 ---
Elected council officials are called Councillors. Councillors represent (stand

for) wards.
City Councils are headed by Mayors. Rural councils are led by Chief Executive

Officers (CEOs).
Parliament is made up of two houses namely the National Assembly and
the Senate. Members of Parliament or the National Assembly represent
constituencies.

The courts are there to guard the constitution.
Indigenous laws and courts were formed to help people in settling disputes.

The National School Pledge is meant to promote a sense of belonging, love
and respect for our country's heritage.

Every citizen has a part to play in observing laws.

The most important duty of every citizen is to respect the law.

The police are primarily there to keep public law and order.

_End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

. The earliest known people to live in Zimbabwe are the

]
A. Khoi Khoi B. Bantu C. San D. Nguni
2. The San lived in
A. tents B. natural caves
D. thatched huts

C. stone houses

3. How did the early people preserve their meat?
B. They dried it.

A. They boiled it.
C. They ate it. D. They.refrigerated it.
4. The San hunted reptiles. An example of a reptile is a
A. baboon B. buck C. lizard SD: dog
5. San men hunted in
A. threes B. twos
D. small groups

C. large groups
Itisnotthe duty of the policefo_
A. send law-breakers to jail B. help break the law
C. arrest accused persons D. enforce road traffic laws
7. The National Schoo! Pledge is meant to asense of belonging.
A. kill B. fight C. promote D. respect
____ js the highest of all traditional courts.
A. The Headman’s Court B. The Chief's Court
C. The Village Cour D. The Supreme Court
9. itis the duty of the police to investigate
A. crime B. someone = C, the pidge 'D. leamers

Scanned by CamsScanner



--- Page 46 ---
10. When reo Ile started to ive together in groups they needed someone to

lead them in ao sid
A. money . food C. disputes OD. theft

Structured questions
Give the English, Shona, Ndebele and Chewa names for the Almighty

[4]

In which two Southern African countries do we find the Kgalagadi Desert?

q)
1 tN AB 607d Q
3. Name one language aga in Southern Africa today that has the

clicking sound.
[1] |

Beek ils)! Ce
4. What are the two nine that the National Schoo! Pledge is meant to

promote.
a)
_ SSE
J ee two examples of indigenous courts.
a
b)
6. Give two roles played by individuals i in observing laws.

Vihar tare S the Iwo . things that ne early p people Eon uted to the

re

[2]

Total [25] |

Glossary

Constituency ms ,
a» - a ies that elects a representative
Constitution “ss “ke Si

Dignity of hard work i > Go
TO ne ¥ Mdividuals in a nation
= 7) economically

WUALIDIUGU vy WALIINUGALIEIUI


--- Page 47 ---
Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 48 ---
End of Term 1 assessment test __—

Paper 1: Multiple choice questions

'. One of the children's roles inthe familyis_o |
A. playing B. feeding chickens
C. sleeping D. bullying others

2. One of your aspirations as a learner at school should —
A. to fail B. to pass
C. to steal D. to be absent

3.

An important family aspiration could be
A. food security B. poor shelter

C. little food D. unéducated children
4. Ahappy gathering could be during
A. a funeral id |

B. a wedding party

C. a family member’siliness

D. the unveiling of a tombstone
S. One strength that may help you to achieve your Aspirations js

A. laziness B. good health

C. poor health D. copying others

6. This processing tool is called _

A. Bulawayo. b. F
9. In Indigenous Religigny, f
place to hold their Gera

A. hut B. kraal Pesce
igenous culture, Wann eo
2 a * = ‘© SISEt people they meet on the
A. kneel ‘B."e

id their knees D. bow

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 49 ---
11. The Environmental Management Agency (EMA) teaches us to.

A. collect medicinal herbs B. conserve our natural resources
C. cut down trees D. get river sand for sale to home builders
12. The period before adulthood is known as
A. puberty B. menstruation C. menopause D. circumcision
13. InIndigenous Religion, the deceased's clothes are normally shared
A. @ day after burial B. a fortnight after burial
C. ayear after burial D. ten years after burial
14, Medicinal herbs are eaten by animals and .
A. fish B. people C. fruits D. pests
15. Which of the following is an important life virtue?
A. dignity of hard work B. laziness
C. dishonesty D. vunfaithfulness
16. Which of the following shrines is associated with rain making ceremonies?
A. Chinhoyi caves B. Bernard Mzeki
C. National Heroes Acre D. Njelele hill
17. Which of the following is not a national monument?
A. National Sports Stadium B. Great Zimbabwe Ruins
C. Matobo hills D. Khami Ruins
18. A village court is led by the ina community.
A. chief B. father C. headman d. elder

19. The is an environmental watchdog.
A. Rural Electrification Agency
B. Environmental Management Agency
C. Consumer Council of Zimbabwe
D. Zimbabwe Council of Churches
20. The most important duty of every citizen is to
A. bribe the police
B. respect the law
C. avoid paying taxes
D. recite the national schoo! pledge
21. The main duty of the police is to
A. mount roadblocks
B. receive bribes from the public
C. maintain public law and order
, D. prevent lawful demonstrations
22. City Councils are headed by ;
A. Mayors B. Members of
C. Provincial Affairs Ministers D. Senators
23. The Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) falls a the Ministry of
A. Defence B. Justice iy
C. Home Affairs D. Local gove ‘gine
24, Councillors represent
A. wards B. constituencies _

Parliament

urban areas

ail

al areas D.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 50 ---
babweans to
courages all Zim

25. The National School Pledge en

A. work hard for ie good of our country

B. promote corruption —

C. hear and love the National flag

D. hate foreigners

Paper 2: Structured questions

Answer in full sentences ae cians
1. a) Write down one role of a pa .
b) Write down one role of a child at til
c) What do you call your father's mothe
da) What is an aspiration?

e) Give one example of a family gathering. Pn
“| What do we call the national shrine where heroes are buried’

True or False :
2. a) a grinding stone (guyo/imbokodo) is a tool.

b) A museum is an example of a shrine.

C) Every child has a right to a birth certificate.

d) At funerals, families gather to eat and drink.

e€) When a family member is ill, relatives celebrate.

Fill in with the correct answers ts

3. Heritage is what we get from our p

futureg___. Woe

4. The G. we monuments in Masvingo are part of our
national heritage.

The Kgalagadi Desert which is home to the San's descendants, is

ind in which two Southern African countries? :
and other domestic animals like g

and we also pass on to

Totem

ii) Nyathi —
ili) Mheta
iv) Humba
'v) Dube

Scanned by CamScanner

(1)
(1)
Total [5]

Cultural heritage. Match the following totem name:

Total [5]


--- Page 51 ---
eat and

(1)

9. Anuclear family unit is made up of am

merc.)
10. Group the following as good or bad manners. Fill in the table below.

a) Arguing with your parents

b) Greeting elders
c) Standing up for the elderly in a bus

d) Shouting at your grandparents

Bad manners

Good manners

Total [5]
Total [50]

Pr
Ha eh
i ey
Je
lI
"he ieee a

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 52 ---
s and responsibilities

Entitlements/right

Objectives

You should be able to: Ty ee
identify children's entitlements and responsibilities
describe children's responsibilities
recognise the need for child protection against various forms of abuse
report any forms of abuse

recognise forms of substance abuse

analyse effects of substance abuse

identify rules and practises that govern human conduct from the past
identify social rules and laws that protect children from abuse

discuss the rules and laws that protect children from abuse.

COONAN WH —

What do you see in the pic | >?
2. Discuss work done by Children ¢

—
.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 53 ---
Key words
neglect abduction
drug/substance abuse

entitlements societies

Introduction

in Zimbabwe, any person below the age of | ; ne GS
have entitlements/rights that have to be observed by their families, institutions
and societies they live in. This is because they are still children who need a lot of
support and guidance from their parents, guardians or anyone caring for them.
Entitlements are rights granted by law or contract. Societies are groups of people

living together and with the same values.

4A. Children’s rights/entitlements

8 years is a minor. This group of people

ood 6 ‘$4 Birth
certificate

Some of the children’s rights are given orally while others are written down as rules
or laws. The constitution of Zimbabwe says that every child has the right to: }
¢ equal treatment before the law
* aname
* parental care or appropriate alternative care
¢ be protected from all forms of abuse
° tei education, nutrition and shelter
¢ not to be recruited into an armed force or tak |
* not to be forced to take part in any political ay gprmediconnc’
he i: ones except as a measure of last resort. and if so detained,
e for a short period, separately from adult persons. with proper

treatment and conditions.
{

OCdIHIea Vy UdlMOoCdI Nel


--- Page 54 ---
4B. Child Protection

Children need protection from various
forms of abuse, unfair treatment and
dangerous conditions. Some elderly
people use children for child labour on
farms and plantations. Children are made
to do jobs and carry heavy things that
could damage their bodies. Children
need protection from people who would
treat them in this manner. Children are §
also in danger of sexual abuse and it
is important for any adult to protect
children from such.

Parents should not leave their children oa
with strangers. Children should not follow “““Ghiigren being abused ina tobacco field

strangers no matter what they offer to
give them. Children are also given rules to help protect them from different forms

of abuse. These rules may include:being home before its dark, not playing far from
their homes, not taking things from strangers and to avoid playing with people
older than them. The picture above shows children working in a tobacco field. |s it

right for them to be doing this sort of work?

Areas children should be protected from

Phin

Vending " Dangerous chemico’

The pictures show different areas childre
nne
soul protect children from: ed to be protected from. We also
Q} De€gging in the streets rug ¥
C) Corporal punishment | 3 owe

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 55 ---
ed to be taught how to speak Up and report
olice station near them. They can also
ave been abused in any way

To protect children from such, they ne
forms of abuse. Children can report at the p they h
tell their parents, guardians or teachers when

|
working in different areas. From the

The pictures in this section show children wo !
illustrations, which rights are being broken? Discuss with your friends. Dy,

Child trafficking
Children are illegally taken away from their homes and
used as cheap labour, for sexual practices, as child
soldiers or work on construction sites and plantations.
This type of trade is known as child trafficking. Children
are trafficked mainly because they can be used better
than adults. They are vulnerable and unable to stand
up to their oppressors. They also cannot demand a
salary or try to run away from employers. The picture

shows a child soldier.

Child soldier

1. List the jobs that are not good for children. |
2. Using the internet, find out about children’s rights/entitlements. Present your |

findings to the class. -
5. In groups, talk about the ways of reporting abuse.

1. What is child trafficking?
2. Children are vulnerable and unable to their oppressor |
3. Children should be protected from and ai if ’
4, Parents should not leave their children with

5. Give two reasons why children are given rules.

Drug/substance abuse has become - 7 ©€OMMON in children in our societies.
Sth leg Ol and illegal drugs. There are

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 56 ---
different forms of substance abuse. These can include sniffing glue, taking drugs
and alcoholic substances. Sniffing glue is very common because glue is readily
available to anyone. It has negative effects that damage the body and brain.
Sniffing glue can cause dizziness and mental disorder. Other children are addicted
to alcohol. They can be taught to take alcohol from an early age. Taking alcohol
can damage their liver and other body organs. It can also lead to bad decisions

like dropping out of school.

Peer pressure Experimenting
Some of the reasons children are getting into such bad behaviours are
experimenting, peer pressure, environment, wrong information, boredom and the
influence of media and public figures. Children like to experiment with new ideas
and feelings and this makes them easy targets for peer pressure. With bad people
around them, it is easy for them to start drug and substance abuse. When a chilc
sees people he/she admires advertise such, the child would also like to copy
Therefore, with bad company, boredom and improper television programs. it ‘:

easy for children to copy and start abusing legal and illegal substances.

Exercise 3

1. Give two reasons why children get into drug and substance abuse.

2. Whatis the term that is used to explain when a child does something because
he/she sees it from friends?

3. What is drug abuse?

4. Two forms of substance abuse are and _:

3. Give two effects of alcohol abuse. :

VV yO ne


--- Page 57 ---
4D. Rules and laws that protect children from abuse
is need for rules and laws that protec:

In order for children to grow up well, there _
them from abuse. There are sets of rules that protect Cty ty Meee
school. The government also makes laws that protect childre Se. The
laws are passed by acts of parliament.

Rules and practices that govern human conduct from the
past

The picture shows an angry parent
severely beating the child. In the
past, parents would beat children
to discipline them. Some parents
would beat their children with pots,
shoes, sjamboks and hands. This is
against the law. It is child abuse and
is punishable by law. In the past, girls
were given to people who provided
for families as a way of saying thank
you. The Shona term for this practice
is kuzvarira. Another act that has
been done in the past is chigadza
mapfihwa/ukuvusa_ amaseko. This |
is when a young girl is givem to her \

brother-in-law should her sister pass  Physicalabuse

away. However, now anyone below
the age of 18 is considered a child and giving them up for sexual activities anc

child labour are crimes punishable by law. The table below shows areas protectec
by law where children are concerned.

Children’s Act ae

ill-treatment of children
- For example, abduction
* Child labour, for example, mines.

Domestic violence : - Injury, broken home
Criminal law (codification " + Rape

Reform) Act ci _» Indecent assault

Maintenance Act
Inheritance

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 58 ---
. State any two forms of ill-treatment that a child must be protected against.
2. Why should children be protected against such ill-treatment? Give one

reason.
Use the jumbled words to answer question number 4.

3. People who rape should be _ tried in and _ (aerrsetd,
cuotr, jialde).

4. Children have many rights according to the Constitution. Give any two
children's rights.

Summary

¢ Observing children’s entitlements/rights enable children to grow into responsible

citizens.

Lack of care of children will result in child abuse.

Rules and laws build good citizens.

Adults should be role models for children to copy.

All forms of child abuse are crimes punishable by law.

Anyone below the age of 18 is considered a child and any bad treatment is

considered abuse.

e Some cultural practices like chigadza mapfihwa/ukuvusa amaseko and
kuzvarirwa are considered child abuse (for as long as the person is below 18

years of age).

Duamunianet choice Beccwins?
1. People who violate human rights should be

A. punished B. praised C. killed D. hanged
2. Anation makes laws to

A. arrest people B. protect people

C. keep the people busy D. send people to prison
3. Children should not take alcohol because it makes them

A. clever B. drunk C. strong D. well
4. Which of the following is not a right?

A. Right to health. B. Right to steal.

C. Right to food. D. 1 to life.

5. Child trafficking is

A. sending children to school
B. when children are illegally taken away from their homes
C. keeping children working Me
D. sending children to hospital ==



--- Page 59 ---
ee

—_—__—_

eA

.*

4 % «

d child abuse.

(2)
Total [25

Ni ie ~
% a3
a rt
7 .

birth or right of the

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 60 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:
identify indigenous forms of shelter in the past and present

identify shelter in other countries
Classify materials used to make shelter
identify factors that influence location of shelter.

Flashback

1. What is shelter?
2. What are the functions of the following types of shelter?
a) Granary b) Church c) Aninternet cafe

d) Ahospital e) Aclassroom

P) Key words

dome nomads

Introduction ,
Shelter is one of the four basic needs of a human being. The other three are food,
clothing and water. There are different forms of shelter. This difference could be

caused by weather conditions and geographical location.

5A. Indigenous forms of shelter

A hut

A hut is a small house with only one or two rooms.
It is usually round in shape and made of locally
available natural materials like wooden poles,
mud, grass and stones. The walls are usually
plastered with dagga (dhaka/udaka). The roof
is conical in shape with a grass thatch. When |
something is ‘conical’, it has the shape of a
cone. A hut has a simple door frame, door, and
tiny windows. It is sometimes called the savanna
or shelter for all seasons. The picture shows a

Classic hut.



--- Page 61 ---
Modern hut
resent has a

The indigenous hut in the p
foundation made of concrete brick walls
plastered with mortar and has a cement
floor. It has a steel door frame, a door
and windows. The conical roof is usually
grass thatched. Today some people use
corugated iron sheets in place of grass
thatch. However, others still use the grass

thatch.

The Tonga huts

The Tonga people in Zimbabwe are
mainly found in Binga. The place is very
hot during both day and night. They
build their huts on stilts for protection

from wild animals.

A hut on stilts

Activity 1
Conduct an educational tour to identify the types of shelter in your loca

ared.

What is a hut?

2. The Tonga build theirhuts on

A. logs - | 8B. steps acti ;
4, Dagga is an English Word for .

A. dhaka/udaka B.madhaka : |
5. State two materials that are'used fe make q a ngazi D. Binga

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 62 ---
5B. Shelter in other countries

a) Igloo

The Eskimos or Inuit people live in Canada
and Alaska in North America. The land
is covered with snow and ice almost alll
year round, The Eskimos cut blocks of ice
into bricks and build igloos. These are ice
shelters. The roof is round like a dome. A
dome is rounded structure. A tunnel leads
to the entrance of an igloo to keep out F
cold wind. There is a warming system inside [gpa
the igloo to protect people from very cold [Avy en
weather. When it becomes warm the ice
melts. Then the Eskimos live in tents instead

of igloos.

b) Pyramids

iy ys:

Pyramids were huge tombs of the Egyptian
Kings known as Pharaohs. They were built
of large blocks of stone which were moved
by hundreds of men into position. They
took many years to complete. The base of
each pyramid was a square and had four
triangular sides rising to a point.

= ot} Toy aay

2 Pyramids

c) Desert tent f
A desert is a sandy and sometimes |
rocky place. It is very hot in the desert
and almost no rain falls there. There
are two large deserts in Africa. These
are the Sahara desert in North Africa |=
and the Kalahari desert in Southern |
Africa. The Ruala Arabs live in the |
Sahara Desert. The climate and land }
there make them move from one |
oasis to another. They cannot grow }
crops because an oasis has not
enough land for that. They use tents ms
for shelter. When their goats, sheep - A desert tent
and camels have eaten all the grass and shrubs where they are. they move to
the next oasis with their tents. These people are nomads. Nomads are people

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 63 ---
oo OU Place }
ce to oe “cage tel goat's hair. The Arabs wh,
ally

who travel from place to pla ‘elle dried bricks. The shelter

U
live in. The tents and ropes ria eter d
permanently near an oasis bu

flat roof because it seldom rains. :

1, Draw shelter from other countr
2. List shelters from other count aa

: i . ote C. ice D. sand
. U ‘
2. i sie name for be in3 TF Bl tant D. stilts
re found in Egypt.
? A. ioe: 8B. Pyramids _ C. Stilts : D. Tents
4. What do the Eskimos use as shelter when it becomes warm’?
A. hut B. Igloos C. tent D. caves
5. What shape is the base of a pyramid?
A. square B. triangle C. circle D. rectangle
6. The Tonga build their huts on | i
A. water B. stilts C. sand D. dagga

9C. Materials used to make shelter

Shelter is made using different materials. The materials used depend on +
geographical location of the place and weather. Shelter also differs in-terms
the time it was built. This means that shelter from the olden days is different fr
the present. Therefore, we have both classic and Contemporary shelter. Class
and contempe ry shelter, in some places, still exist together.

Classic shel
An example o
local rural area, Th
bark (makavi/inax a) and
build their huts. MG ip uk

“i is a hut. Materials used to Build a hut are from 4
~~ Ge Wooden poles, stones, grass, Clay, string from |
W dung. Some People still use these material:

Contemporary shel

Contemporary shelteris me

contemporary shelter isan Present time. An example

, pea te ferials USEd to build a house incluc
window frames, steel door fray " ‘ ASbestos sheets timber, nails, stec

Id Nuts, glass, Paint and wooden door:


--- Page 64 ---
Go out on a day trip and:
a) name the classic shelter in the

i area.
sf a ae ali used to build the classic shelter.
oak erials used to build modern shelter.
a) a model of classic shelter.
b) a model of modern shelter.

Exercise 3

1. An example of classic shelter is a

A. flat B. double-storey Cc. hut D. pole
2. is material used to build a modern house.

A. Concrete 8B. Dagga C. Pole D. Animal skin
3. Puta tick against the type of shelter

Contemporary

5D. Types of shelter according to geographical areas

depend on where they have been built, their geographical
ctors which influence a type of shelter in an area are:

Some types of shelter
area (location). The fa

Weather

Weather defines how ho
in the area and how hars
Zimbabwe's rural areas are rou

+ it becomes; how cold it becomes; how much rain falls
h are the winds in the area. The most common shelter in
nd huts. They are built with grass, poles and dagga
(from the same area). The grass thatch allows the hut fo be cool during the no!
season and warm during the cold season. When it is hot, the huts provide o cool
shade and when it's cold they provide warmih. The rainy region Ngazi type of huts
are built on stilts using poles and grass from the local area. It is very hot and wet in
the rainy season and the huts are set on stilts for them to stand above [ne ound.

This protects the Tonga people from possible floods.

The type of soil in the area
The type of soil determines the foundation. This in turn determine> the shelter. Fo!
example, places with sand need deep foundations. Places with clay May need

ocdnneda DY UdmMocdnner


--- Page 65 ---
bec type of soil is sel-supportive. It is not loose jj...
retaining structures ause this
sand.

Building materials available in inne the type of shelter. For examy),
Building materials in an area also sap abe ble material they have that coujq
Eskimos use ice blocks because ice is the avallan’t al skin and logs because 1h,,
keep them warm in winter, The Khoi Khoi used anim

was the available material they had.

; |
Study the shelterin your area andiist the geographical factors thatinfluenced |

how they were built. ,
2. Write similar things and different things about the types of shelter in you;

area and another area which you know.

Summary

* Indigenous forms of shelter in Zimbabwe include the hut and the Ngazi stilts.

* Shelter in other countries include pyramids, igloos, the desert tent and SUI
dried mud brick buildings.

* The Tonga stilt huts protect the people's harvest from pests.

* Amodern house is an example of contemporary shelter.

° There are four basic factors that influence the location of shelter. These are
weather, soil type and materials available.

* Materials to build shelter are either taken from the local area or bought fron

suppliers.

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

i, Ne nee common form of shelter in rural Zimbabwe is
A. the Ngazi_ B. the hut C. the igloo
The Conical roof of a hut Usually has atch Be inetent
A brick i B. iron sheets
. grass AD. asbestos sh
An igloo is built of RY { ?-

4 cement Dit 8. sun dried bricks
. stones _D) ice blocks bri
The Sahara Deseftis foune it m eae
A. Southern Africa’ !
C. North Africa

D.

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 66 ---
A. Egypt B. Zimbabwe C. Alaska D. Zambia
is one of the materials used to build a hut.
A. Grass B. Asbestos C. Tiles D. Leaves
adhe 3 dried mud brick shelters have because it seldom rains in the
A. conicalroofs 8B. flat roofs C. high roofs D. no roofs
_. 1s an example of classic shelter.
A. An oasis B. Ahut C. A flat D. A double storey
The Tonga of the Zambezi Valley are people.
A. lazy B. permanent C. pastoral D. nomadic
. In Zimbabwe, the Tonga are found in
A. Binga B. Nyamandlovu C. Harare D. Masvingo

Glossary

Desert =

Geographicallocation —-
Self-supportive *

Pyramids are found in

Structured questions
a) Pyramids are found in (1)

b) They were used as for the Pharaohs. (1)
Three factors that influence shelter are and ; bes}
The nomadic Ruala Arabs move from one oasis to another in search
of for their livestock. (1)
Why do people need shelter? Give one reason. !
©: 2 1 Eee aes (1
The Tonga hut is built on stilts to protect people from __ and __. (2)
Name two materials which are used to build a modern rn house. (2)
State two advantages of using huts as a shelter in the savanna climate
regions. (2)
When the ice melts, Eskimos leave the ____——s andilivein__ (2)
Total [25]

island whichisso dry thatvery few plants can grow

on it.
position of a place on the earth.

supporting itself.



--- Page 67 ---
Objectives
You should be able to:

ders :

identify local service provid elder
: Be hinchors of local social ance :
3, describe the services offered by

ocial service providers.

1. Make alist of the groups of people that need help In your community
2. For each group, list the help you can give.

Introduction

Local social service providers come in different forms. Some like Churches, provid:
their services free of charge. Others, like urban and rural Councils, do so for |
nominal fee or charge. Some local service providers are self-financing while othe:
receive some financial help from the government. Local sociq| SErvice provide)
are there mainly to improve the living standards of the '
Poor, elderly and other vulnerable QlOUPs in our socj
people who are in need of something

and food. ¥

‘
. ;
=|

yy

6A. Local socia| sel

&

Churches * ag
Churches of different religious ¢

community members with di Sons Provide social SErvices to differen

po Problems and needs. Religious

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 68 ---
.|
as ee a

Church delegates donating food blankets, books, and clothes to orphans

denominations are the different churches in the society. Some orphanages are
run by churches. For example, churches have organisations like Christian Care. The
organisation was formed by the Zimbabwe Council of Churches in 1967. It helps
sick people, orphans and people living with disabilities. For example, when the
Tokwe-Mukosi Dam flooded in Masvingo, the organisation helped by donating,
among other things, a seven-tonne truck and fuel.

Churches play an important role in caring for orphans and other vulnerable
children. They care for people living with HIV/AIDS, provide food relief and improve
health and education services. Churches also give spiritual support to sick people
and prison inmates. They help society through giving encouragement and hope
to people.

Councils

Both urban and rural councils provide basic social services like water, refuse
collection, road maintenance, education and health. In urban areas, councils
provide refuse collection services. This is collecting garbage from homes to make
sure people stay in clean and healthy places. Council workers maintain roads

by filling in potholes and cutting grass on roadsides. Councils also provide health
services for a low charge.

Orphanages

A number of orphanages have been set Up in different parts of Zimbabwe to
fake care of orphans. amples of such are Matthew Rusike Children's Home
In Epworth, Emerald Hill in Emerald Hill, Emthunzini Wethemba and Thembiso
Children's Home in Bulawayo. A number of Organisations have helped start and

a ee? |

scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 69 ---
maintain these orphanages. Some churches also have os to ook after
orphans and street kids. People in the society help these orp ges Dy Gonating

food, clothing and books.

Copy and complete the table below with names of orphanages and where
they are found. Do not mention the ones above.

Where is it found

Name of orphanage

ip hee,

Old People’s Homes
Traditionally, old people were taken care of by their children and relatives. Most
Zimbabweans still maintain this practice. However, in some cases old people are
looked after in Old People’s Homes like Zororai in Sakubva, BumhudZzo in Harare,
i in Bulawayo. People

Masvingo Old People’s Home in Masvingo and Entemben
in the community help with donations to these places. They give food, clothes

blankets and services.
Zunde raMambo/Isiphala seNkosi

Community members cultivating land

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 70 ---
The Zunde raMambo/Isiphala seNkosi was a traditional food security strategy that
was meant to keep hunger at bay. When communities harvested their crops, they
took some of the harvested rapoko, millet and maize to their chief. The food was
carefully stored and used to help the hungry; especially visitors, strangers and
beggars. Government has revived and modernised this tradition as part of our
cultural heritage. It is meant to have supplies for the needy and whenever there
is a disaster.

Exercise ]

is GN orphanage in Bulawayo.
A. ZunderaMambo —_B. Matthew Rusike CC. Thembiso D. Epworth
Churches often give spiritual support to hospital patients and prison inmates.
[True/False]
Two opharnages found in Zimbabwe are sand
Give two examples of materials donated to orphanages.
Give one example of council roles.

6B. Functions of local social service providers

Local social service providers offer different types of services. These include
the provision of basic services like water, road maintenance, schools and
clinics. Churches offer material, educational, health and spiritual support to the
less privileged members of society. Some government service providers, like
Basic Education Assistance Module (BEAM), help in paying for the education
of underprivileged children. There are other providers like the African Albino
Foundation in Zimbabwe. It helps in empowering albinos and providing sun lotion
for skin protection.

Zimbabwe Red Cross

The Zimbabwe Red Cross Society is a voluntary organisation that protects life and
health. It helps the Government of Zimbabwe to provide help to people who are
living in very hard conditions and are suffering because of war, floods and other
disasters. It supplies people with aid, for example, food, clothes and shelte (tents),
medicines and other basic needs. It trains young people to be volunteer members
of the Red Cross. It also teaches people First Aid and helps nurses and doctors to
look after sick people in hospitals and rural clinics.

Legal Resources Foundation

The LegalResources Foundation (LR F) gives information and teaches Zimbabweans
about the country's laws for free. The poor and the unemployed can visit the
Legal Resources Foundation offices for free legal aid. It makes many booklets that
Talk about the law in simple English, Shona and Ndebele

‘iid

VUGIIIGU Vy VaOliouadrirrot


--- Page 71 ---
Justice for Children P lawayo and Mutare

Children Trust has offices in po. a fui to children no Wi
The Justice ee 5 Qnisation which gives free er able, those wi liffic,
th ratte Y. chien Wino have serious ed r people to get free hel we
SUCTION or abandoned COMERTEES Ce ond in kind from dan”
this orgunbation. The organisation receives help in cas IM donor

ZIMCARE TRUST
Zimcare Trust is a private voluntary and non-profit De tare ol ,
It was registered with the government in 1982. It an a ar learin che Of cy
provide education to children and adults with special nee Peak so re ‘ ISabilit)
The Trust has specially built schools for children to learn y ; a they a
become useful citizens of Zimbabwe when they leave the centres. The learne.,
in Zimcare Trust Special Schools are taught by specially trained teachers \))

understand their needs.

Activity 2
1. As aclass, visit an orphanage near your school. Donate clothes and food
2. Match the following services with their service providers.

Service Service provider

a

7 Me fernet, research about a local service provider of your cho:
und, what it does and when it was formed) .

The African Albino foundation donates lotion to albinos

A. water — _B. sun C. earth D. silk
f ’

2. helps in paying for
A. Justice for Children - me ieced Children.

3. The Zimbabwe Red Cross $c - BEAM D. Red €
SS SOCie : ~

/False) ily SQ voluntary Organisation that prote

List two functions of local
What is the main funetion of



--- Page 72 ---
Summary

Social services are offered by different organisations like the government,

church, councils and private organisations.

Local authorities for urban areas provide residents with basic services like

water, schools, clinics and road maintenance.

Some local service Providers are more concerned with vulnerable groups in
society that include the poor, sick, elderly, orphans and people living with
disabilities, both physical and mental.

The traditional practice of Zunde raMambo/Isiphala seNkosi ensures food
security and benefits the less fortunate members of society who would
otherwise go hungry.

| End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions
Who pays teachers, nurses and doctors?

A. The government B. Plan Zimbabwe

C. Donors D. Mbada Diamonds

A volunteer works for

A. the government B. donors C. food D. no pay

Which of the following is a Local Voluntary and Humanitarian Organisation?

A. The Jairos Jiri Association B. Plan International

C. The Red Cross : D. Doctors without borders.

People who cannot —_____ use sign language.

A. read B. write C. see D. speak

Braille is a reading system for _____ people.

A. deaf B. blind C. old D. poor
gives free legal help to children in difficult situations

A. The Legal Resources Foundation B. Plan International

C. The Zimbabwe Red Cross Society D. The Justice for Children Trust

Zimcare Trust takes care of and provides education to Children
A. whose parents have died

B. whose parents are unemployed

C. with special needs or learning disabilities

D. who run away from home

The African Albino foundation donates lotion to albinos.

A. water B. sun C. earth D. silky
helps in paying for the education of underprivileged children.
A. SAPP B. Zimbabwe C. BEAM D. Red Cross
is an orphanage in Harare.

A. ZunderaMambo __—B._ Matthew Rusike C. Thembiso D. Entembeni

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 73 ---
Structured questions

1. Name any four local social service providers.

(a)

(b)

(¢), ——_______— 4]

aan people include people living with disabilities. Copy and

complete the following sentences. m

Blind people are unable to _____.. A)

Deaf people are unable to ____. nm

Speech impaired people cannot . ;

A ——___ works freely and willingly for no pay. [1]
is @ reading system for the blind. [1]

Children whose parents have died are looked afterinan_—. [1]

What is the role of the following service providers?

(a) Zimbabwe Red Cross

(6) Legal Resources Foundation

(c) Justice for Children [3]

?. What is the other indigenous term for “Zunde ramambo"? [1]

]

0. Zunde ramambo ensures ____ security [1]
Total [25]

ONO RW

Q very small amount.
a place where old people live and are looked after.

an organisation that earns all the money it needs to
pay its own costs.

services that are given by a government, council, church
and other organisations to help the people.

|
Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 74 ---
Natural heritage: Production, distribution and
consumption of goods and services

Objectives

You should be able to:
explain sustainable met

hods of conservinc
aga g the natural resources
list indigenous methods of manufacturing goods

describe indigenous methods of m

| ) anufacturing goods
describe types of industries in the country v9
trace the development of industries in Zimbabwe
explain barter trade

give examples of barter trade.

EE ON RO NT

1. Look at the picture. What do you see?
2. List other natural resources you learnt about in Grade 3. |

Keywords

natural resources _ rural electrification water harvesting
conserve adze gully erosion
_ recycle statue land reclamation
__facto

Introduction
Zimbabwe is blessed with an abundance of natural resources. Natural resources
are very useful and important substances that occur naturally at a place. *o™ ples
of these are minerals, oil, soil, vegetation, water and animals. !f ‘5 abated 4
responsibility to conserve these resources for the benefit of future gene’.
conserve is to protect or use something well so that it can be used 10 ripe ne
resources can be used by indigenous people to manufaciu'® goo" reek
produced can be used for barter trade between people of 1° sa

between countries.

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 75 ---
| resources

ation of natura
resources

7A. Conserv

Methods of conserving natural

Tree planting

ber of people continues

e demand for | he _
cook | y | \ia

As the num
to grow, so does th
more trees to build shelters.
food, make furniture and so on.
Although we cannot stop the
cutting down of trees, there are
measures or things that we can do
so that our beautiful country does
not lose its beauty and become
bare (treeless). Every first Saturday
of December has been chosen for
tree planting in Zimbabwe. This Is
done to conserve trees and the soil.

take Learners planting trees

Schools encourage learners to
part in this activity so as to teach them the importance of trees and impart a |
planting culture to them.

Below are some ways of conserving vegetation (trees).

¢ Paper products like old newspapers and manila can be recycled. To re.
is to change waste materials such as plastic bags and bottles so that the,
be used again. Recycled paper means less trees wil be cut down. This
helps to keep the environment clean by avoiding litter.

Encourage people to plant and take care of their own tree woodlots. Th

help to save trees and the land.
Governments can also relocate people from Communal areas to reduc:
number of people who need firewood.
Rural electrification will reduce the demand for wood fuel and save |
fication is the provision of electricity to rural communities.

J 0 replace the trees that would have been cut down.

rowing trees like gum ee
g g trees like gum trees ond indigenous trees can be grown.

Water harvesting
Harvesting water from

be used for washing clothes, 6°
vays in Which water is wasted. O
eas. There are also a nume
Her harvesting. Water harv«

and watering the garden. There:
them is through burst pipes €
ways of conserving water a

ocanned Dy Vamocanner


--- Page 76 ---
Tank showing water harvesting

is the capture and storage of water, especially rain water. For example, each
homestead could have pipes directing rain water from the roof into tanks. See
the picture above. Another form of water harvesting is using buckets to capture
rain water during the rainy season. This water can be used for washing, cleaning,
bathing, watering gardens and other chores within a homestead. There are also
a number of ways of conserving water. These include: attending to leaking taps
and pipes, using irrigation methods that do not waste water; turning off public taps

that are left running in parks, toilets and ot

her public places and water recycling.

Activity 1
In groups, research about the advantages of planting trees every year.
In pairs, come up with a list of things you can do fo conserve water.

In groups, talk about other methods of harvesting water.
Using the internet, research on different water harvesting methods. Present

your findings in class.

RWON—

Land reclamation

Land reclamation is the act
is done after land has been

of changing damaged land and making if usable. This
damaged, either by floods, deforestation or flooding.
An example of damage to land is gully erosion. Gully erosion is the removal of
soil along drainage lines by surface water. When there is not enough vegetation
to hold the soil, it is washed away and leads to land damage. There are ways Of
reclaiming gullies so Os to improve the land. People use stones, wire: branches,
grass, soil and cement to reclaim damaged land. To make sure that the land
does not lose more soil, planting vegetation helps to hold the soil and protect
it from running water. The pictures on the next page show three stages in gully
reclamation.

s a

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 77 ---
a) Degraded land b) Gully reclamation c) Land reclaimed

Stages in gully reclamation

What is water harvesting? |
When is tree planting day in Zimbabwe?
State two ways of conserving water.

What is land reclamation?
People use and to reclaim damaged land.

C7 Penida

7B. Indigenous methods of manufacturing goods

Methods of manufacturing goods

Welding

Welders use metal to produce a
wide vaniety ofitems thatinclude |
window and door frames, gates,

fences, burglarbars, scotch carts

and ploughs. Welders can also

get their materials from recycled
waste material and use it to
repair scotch carts and ploughs,
Welders wear special'glasses or
goggles that protect their eyes
when they are welding, They
make use of welding machines.

VUCGIIIGCU VY VAlIOUAIITICI


--- Page 78 ---
Pounding (Ukugiga/Kutswa)
Pounding involves the use of a pestle
and mortar. Traditionally, pounding was
done by women. However, it was not
unusual for the men to help out. Millet
rapoko, peanuts and maize can be
pounded.

Grinding

This method uses a grinding stone.
Grinding is a method that is still being
used by a number of Zimbabweans.
Small grains like sorghum, millet and
rapoko can be ground into mealie-
meal. Roasted peanuts can be ground
into peanut butter. See the picture of a
young girl grinding peanut butter.

Grinding

Carving

Carving involves the use of simple tools
like adzes (mbezo/isancele) to make
hoe and axe handles and yokes USING
wood. An adze is a tool similar fo an axe,
with an arched blade at right angles to
the handle, used for cutting or shaping
large pieces of wood. Some products
of carving include wooden basins and
candle stands. Some carvings are made
of stone. Someone who carves objects
from stone or wood is called a Carver.

Sculpturing

Carving

Sculpturing involves the use of stone,
metal or wood to make works of art
like the Zimbabwe bird or statues. A
statue is a human or animal image
‘that is made of stone, wood. metal or
other substances and is usually large.
‘An artist who makes sculpture is called
‘a sculptor. Dominic Benhura, Colleen
‘Madamombe and Job Kekana are
‘Well known Zimbabwean sculptors.

Sculpturing

canned by CamsScanner


--- Page 79 ---
Moulding

Moulding can involve _ brick:
pottery. Brick moulding involves th...
of clay to make bricks. The dry bric,
baked in a kiln which is Go type of o.
Traditionally, wood has been Use
brick kilns. However, today coal is »
ysed. Pottery refers to objects suc)
plates and cups that are made 0
clay and baked in an oven so that |)
become hard. Traditionally, clay w,,
used to make pots for cooking, keep
beer and storing water and milk.

Moulding

Weaving

Natural fibres from tree bark and plants
like water reeds were used to weave mats.
Some people still make mats from natural
fibres. Different things can be produced
through weaving, for example, reed-mats,
chairs, tables and baskets.

During your Art lessons:

a) make use of available natural fibres such as sisal to make items such as ‘Or
and mats.

b) use clay fo mould objects such as pots and cups.

Vee a
Po eh

Moulding ow :
nut butter

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 80 ---
——

B eive two examples of grain that eo + | ds sal .
3, Whatis an adze? Ye Ground using the grinding tone

Iding c involve
4. Moulding can involve and

7C. Types of industries

Industries make = produce different types of goods. Our industries can be put into
three main groups: primary, secondary and tertiary.

Primary industries

Farming

s from nature to be used to
farming, mining, fishing and

forestry. In primary industries raw materials are processed without undergoing
much change. Some of the processes are washing, digging, packing, crushing and
freezing. For example, in maize farming, farmers are only interested in producing
maize and not really processing the maize into mealie meal. Other examples are
mining, poultry and dairy farming. Poultry and dairy farms are only concerned
with producing chickens and milk and not the processing oF packaging. Mining

s concerned with getting minerals fr Ol

om the ground and not the processing ©
cutting. For example, the Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Mining Company
mines diamonds at

the Chiadzwa Diamond fields in Marange. The processing 's
done by the next stage of industries. This stage is the secondary indusi'y

uce or take out raw material
produce goods. Examples of primary industries are

Primary industries prod

1. Visit a primary industry in your locality.
2. In groups, find out about the minerals mined in Zimbabwe.

3. List the different crops grown in Zimbabwe.

- a ~ |
ey Sa Laat |

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 81 ---
Secondary industries

Textile manufacturing

Secondary industries process and manufacture goods in factories. Factories ¢,
groups of buildings where large quantities of goods are produced using machin...
Secondary industries are often called manufacturing industries. They proces: 7
materials into totally different products. For example, timber to paper Crude
to petrol, unprocessed fish to canned fish, sugarcane to sugar, fiber to fabric ..,

chicken packaging. Some of the industries that manufacture products are p-

textile, timber and home industries.

i) Milling industries

Milling indusines produce products like sugar and flour. Sugarcane js gro
sugar plantations. In Zimbabwe, these plantations are at Hippo Valley Es‘c
Triangle and Chiredzi. The sugarcane is processed in sugar mills. It is then | =f

in @ sugar refinery to produce sugar. The sugar is transported to whole
throughout the country.

ii) Textile industries

Textile industries produce cloth or fabric that is used for making things su.
clothes or curtains. The cotton that is used tO produce cloth is grown on fa

is processed into wool or other fibres at cotton ginneries.

iii) Timber industries

Timber industries get their limber from forestry industries. They process the *

_ urniture Gnd doors. Border Timbers factory in Mutare

Many people in Zimbabwe hay
creating employment for thems
of goods that meet local n
frames and wire fences. Som

Me
Hed their own small industries as a
nd others, They produce a wide '
Oduce metal goods like doors,
Soffins Ond home furniture. Ot!

VUAHTICU VY YVAlIOVUAIIIcl


--- Page 82 ---
involved in wood : i cits
neal Boplances db Carving. Some repair televisions. radios and other
es, ehicle repairs, pottery, basketry and crotchetry are also

carried out.

Tertiary industries

Banking hall

Tertiary industries can also be called service industries. These industries do not have
raw materials. They do not produce products. These industries help to provide
a link between the different industries and their customers. Examples of tertiary
industries include publishing, transport, banking, insurance, nursing, teaching,
tourism, entertainment, marketing and security services, selling and advertising.

Activity 4

Sources of different products
Crops, trees and animals provide the materials that are used to make various

products. Copy and complete the table below.
, 4

‘Maize

OVALIICU VY VAillovudti ici


--- Page 83 ---
hag tie examples of Zimbabwean a... INVOlved |,
production and marketing of various products. Classify them under the 4,
types of industries.
Gushungo Dairi
cheese.

2. Tanganda Tea Comp
3. Border timbers — proce
4. Bakers Inn - produces bread.

5. Cairns Food- produces tinned foods.
6

7

8

9

T
i

es — processes milk into various milk products like yogj,

—
.

ses tea leaves.

any - proces
; nto doors and roofing timber.

sses timber |

Willowton - produces cooking oll, margarine and soap.
Barclays bank — provides banking services.
Forestry Commission — manages pine and wattle plantations.
_ Bata Shoe Company - produces shoes and other leather products.
10. Murowa Diamonds - mines diamonds.
11. Quest Motors - assembles vehicles.
12. First Mutual — provides insurance services.
13. Zimplats — mine platinum.
14. Safeguard — provides security services.
15. Ok Supermarkets — sells a wide range of foods and non-food items.

16. Tenda Buses — provides public transport services.
_ Ernst and Young - provides accounting services especially to companie:

7D. Barter Trade

Trade is the exchange of goods or
commodities. Barter trade is the
exchange of produ

crops and others kept
cattle. Some were @
game and others made
and axes. This would mal
people to trade with W:
to get what they did not hav:
exchange of food products
products. Others exchanged

: Sails:

Barter trade

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 84 ---
“Scanned by Camscanner

a - date, this form of trade is still used, especially in situations where money
IS 4 Ap o come by. Barter trade benefits both parties. It is, however, difficult
ie oe tone. whether the exchange of goods in barter trade is fair to both
ee un oxample, for how many bags of maize would one exchange
for a big goat? How many goats would one need to get a cow?

Activity 5

1. Identify some goods that Zimbabw ;
€ could ’
2. In groups, dramatise barter trade. MIE SXCH ENS Mee ie OA ee

Exercise 4

What is barter trade?
Trading a cow for money is barter trade. [True/False]
Give two examples of barter trade.

is the simplest and earliest form of trade.
Can countries be involved in barter trade?

Summary

e Our natural resources include soil, vegetation, water, minerals such as gold,
diamonds and coal, animals, birds and fish, wind and solar energy.

Natural resources must be used wisely. fae future generations also need them.
Industries can be grouped into primary, secondary and tertiary industries.
Trade is the exchange of goods or commodities.

Barter trade is the exchange of goods and services without using money.

| End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Which of the following natural resources is a natural home for fish?
A. water B. soil C. vegetation D. minerals

9. Which of the following minerals is mined at Chiadzwa in Marange?

A. gold B. coal C. diamonds D. tin

3. We must conserve our natural resources for __—=__.

A. foreigners B. future generations
C. ourselves only D. other countries

4. One of the causes of the First Chimurenga was the unfair distribution of an

important resource. What is this resource?
A. water B. minerals ve
Solar energy comes from
A. the water B. the soil

D. vegetation

D. vegetation

a ,

oy



--- Page 85 ---
that peop.
Urban Councils sometimes control the 2) aiveltaae ae Peo;
allowed only a fixed amount. This practice Is c
A. soil erosion B. rotational grazing
C. sanctions D. water rationing
Veld fires must be avoided because
A. they cause drought.
B. they make hunting difficult.
C. they destroy the ma NS 5
D. they force people to have fireguards.
Alot of walk neat for people to use in urban areas gets lost through ___
A. theft B. burst pipes
C. evaporation D. water rationing
Grass should be protected from especially by goats which tea; ,,

grass roots. .
A. Overcrowding B. overgrazing C. ploughing D. Overheg,
. Planting grass and trees is one way of conserving :
C. wind D. water

A. minerals B. soil
Structured questions

Give three examples of natural resources.
a) :

b)

Cc) :
State two ways of conserving natural resources.
Define the following terms:

a) Land reclamation

b) Water harvesting /

Give two of the main reasons for the First Chimurenga.

Moving animals from one paddock to another after a period

of time is called __. [1]
Veld fires must be avoided because : |
State three methods of manufacturing goods.

Total [25]

Glossary
Bare i. Jas nothing growing on it.
Degradedland - tt at has lost its natural productivity due to
things. For example, soil erosion, loss of so
i, SS Of vegetation cover.

“Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 86 ---
of Term 2 assessment test

Paper 1: Multiple choice questions
f1.s ed protects Us from
| 1 is Usually built of . 5
| P A. Reeacrete stones, tiles and grass
He B. wooden poles, dagga and grass
C. steel poles and grass
D. ice blocks and glass
| 3. The Ruala Arabs make tents and répes.from

| A. camel skins B. goats’ hair

| C. ostrich feathers D. sisal fibre’

| 4. The igloo is built of ice blocks in
A. the Zambezi Valley B. very hot deserts
-C. very cold regions D. mountainous areas

15. ee |S the capture and storage of water, especially rain water.

sa A. Water harvesting B. Soilerosion C. Rainwater D. Water recyling
| 6. Arabs who live permanently near an oasis build

A. sun-dried brick houses with flat roofs

B. sun-dried brick houses with grass thatch

C. tent houses

! D. ice block houses with flat roofs

7. Some geographical factors influencing the type of shelter in an area are

ai A. weather. soil type and building materials
| 8. weather, wild animals and people

| C. weather, machines and people

7 D. weather, crops grown and people

{8 The pyramids in Egypt were used as for the Pharaohs.
B. stadiums C. schools D. churches

Responsible children should
A. bullyone another 8B. take care of their bodies

C. lie to their parents D. drink lots of alcoho!

The following treatments of a child are punishable by law, except —
B. child marriage C. childlabour OD. neglect

eo

d parents ) '’:
.. leave their children with strangers F
Jeave their children playing far fromhome 4
sexually abuse their children Fae
guide and counsel their children ie

‘
nae
canned by CamScanner



--- Page 87 ---
ofit socic , ovider? =

12. Which of the following eu ght ee ig service pr |
A. Hospitals . Omnibuses

C. Churchee D. Funeral service Ee i, = |

13. Vulnerable groups in our society include the poor, ine elderly, orphan; ,,,._ |

A. therich B. people living with disabilities
C. prophets D. traditional leaders
14. The Basic Education Assistance Module (BEAM) isa government programmn,,
meant to help learners from .
A. theruralareas 8B. urban areas
C. mining areas D. very poor families ;
15. Which of the following is an example of a natural disaster?

A. veld fire B. money shortage
C. drought D. corruption |
16. Refuse collection involves the proper gathering and disposal of oo
A. old clothes B. rubbish C. soil D. stones
17. Traditionally, old people were looked after by
A. strangers B. churches

C. traditional leaders D. their children and relatives

18. Paper products like old newspapers and cardboard boxes can be changed
and used again. This process is called
A. conservation B. recycling

C. reclamation D. deforestation

19. Atschool we can keep our environment clean by
A. throwing rubbish everywhere B. avoiding litter
C. eating in class D. watering flowers

20. The supply of electricity to rural communities is known as
A. Zimbabwe Electricity Supply
B. Rural migration
C. Rural electrification
D. Rural resettlement
21. Water can be conserved through ak
A. burst pipes B. water harvesting
C. carelessusage DD. leaking taps
22. Someone who carves objects from stone or wood is called a
A. carpenter © B. cartoonist C. carver D. cover
23. Dominic Benhura and the late Job Kekana are well known Zimbabwec

A. musicians 7 B. dancers C. scul stria
24, Which of the Tollowing is an example i ephausty> yl

A. Transport = B. Fishing C. Milling D. Mining
25. The exchange Of goods or commodities is known as

A. marketing B. trade ?

C. advertising D. Manufacturing

oCdNnNead VY UdINoCdNel



--- Page 88 ---
Why do we need shelter? Give one reason.

| (1)

2. Give one example of Zimbabwean indigenous shelter? (1)

3. Name a type of shelter in the Sahara Desert. (1)

4. Write down two geographical factors which influence types of shelter. (1)

5. Write down natural materials used to make the traditional hut. d we bas
ota

6. Write down two ways in which the girl child was abused in the past. ‘
ae
OO REE SS as aa eel (1)
7. List three children's rights.
(a (1)

(1)
| (¢) —__________ Total [5]

| 8. Name any three responsibilities that children have. (3)

9. Give two reasons why children end up taking drugs? (2)
Total [5]
| 10. Identify two groups of civil servants who are paid by the government. (2)

11. List three ways in which harvested water can be used. (3)
I. | Total [5]
Total [50]

Pie

canned by CamScanner


--- Page 89 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:
list problems for the increasing need for transport

suggest some possible solutions to transport problems
identify major roads in Zimbabwe

interpret road and rail maps

distinguish between public and private forms of transport
compare public and private forms of communication
identify road signs and signals
interpret road signs and signals.

Pa Oe

1. Name the means of transport in the picture.
2. What other means of transport do you know?

Key Words
goods

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 90 ---
HMMrOQGUCTION

Good j

i aap eel need to be transported to the place where they are needed

i . - herefore, there is need for efficient and reliable transport systems.

eels aie Pring ete and services we also need effective communication ways.

ars Qoingte oe ae can be transported that are not passengers. In this topic you

look at the incre at transport and communication networks in Zimbabwe. You wil

férreud safety eee Los for transport, major roads and rail networks, the need
: Public and privat ms

7b wel private forms of transport and communication In

8A. The increasing need for transport
Wf re od a
. )

Nowadays there are so many people and goods that need to be taken from one
eople is caused by the growing of industries

pluce to another. The movement of p
and shops that need workers and goods for them to operate. Alot of people move
and a better life. This has led to a rise in the

to the urban areas in search for jobs
rt in the urban and rural areas. The number

number of people in need of transpo
people and goods that need to be transported requires a large number of vehicles
which at times create road carnage. Road carnage are accidents on the road
d to loss of life. There are a number of advantages anc

that, most of the time, lea
disadvantages that have come with the increasing need for transpor'
i) Advantages | é
* Increase in the number of cars, buses and trains. \
¢ Better roads. e

A lot of goods can be transported at one go.

It is easier to move from one place to another. —
Increase in employment opportunities. zi

VUGTIIGU Vy YVaAlIVvvVUalilivcl


--- Page 91 ---
Introduction

Goods and services need to be transported to the place where they are needed
and canbe used. Therefore, there is need for efficient and reliable transport systems.
When we move goods and services we also need effective communication ways.
Goods are things that can be transported that are not passengers. In this fopic you
are going to look at transport and communication networks in Zimbabwe. You will
look at the increasing need for transport, major roads and rail networks, the need
for road safety and public and private forms of transport and communication In

Zimbabwe.

8A. The increasing need for transport

a

Nowadays there are so many people and goods that need to be taken from one
place to another. The movement of people is caused by the growing of industries
and shops that need workers and goods for them to operate. Alot of people move
to the urban areas in search. for jobs and a better life. This has led to a rise in the
number of people in need of transport in the urban and rural areas. The number of
people and goods that need fo be transported requires a large number of vehicles
which at times create road carnage. Road carnage are accidents on the road
that, most of the time, lead to loss of life. There are a number of advantages and
disadvantages that have come with the increasing need for transport.

i) Advantages

¢ Increase in the number of cars, buses and trains..

° Better roads. Se
* Alot of goods can be transported at one go.

* Itis easier to move from one place to another, —

* Increase in employment opportunities, _ £
) : - 6

Scanned by CamScanner



--- Page 92 ---
li) Disadvantages

* Road accidents.

* Toomany vehicles. T
of vehicles.

Air pollution.

People become lazy.
Many passengers.
Over loading.

* Speeding.
Solutions to problems arising from the increasing need fo,
transport.

Problem Solution
Traffic congestion —
er loading

his leads to traffic congestion. Congestion is overcy.,,,

4

i Put robots, round abouts and humps.
Ir hat Carry large numbers of People

Road carnage _Train in defensive driving and put traffic cameras
oe Cisse a .

Tplen aah teat)

\ir pollution.

b) Many passeng

c) 7h” ores

Causes road car

“i

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 93 ---
3, Give one advantage for the increased need for transport. |

4, Give one disadvantage for the increased need for transport |

8B. Major roads and rails in Zimbabwe

Zimbabwe major roads

Victoria

Key
fe  mojor road

HHH HH rail networks

Map showing major roads and rail networks in Zimbabwe

All major roads in Zimbabwe are tarred whilst minor roads are gravel or air
roads. The above map shows major roads and rail networks in Zimbabwe. Iwo
of the major roads in Zimbabwe are the Harare-Bulawayo highway and Harare-

Beitbridge highway.

Activity 2 |
|1. Using the map above, identify: SU
a) the major roads in Zimbabwe ;
~_ b) the rail networks.
2. Using the internet, research the names ¢



--- Page 94 ---
. ‘ { — John would like to visit
|. John lives in Harare. His uncle Jabu lives In Masvinge: pass through to \ ‘
uncle Jabu by train. Name the three towns “

uncle Jabu in Masvingo.
A. Marondera, Kwekwe, GwerU
B. Kwekwe, Gweru, Bulawayo
C. Kadoma, Kwekwe, GweruU
D. Bindura, Chinhoyi, Hwange sre th
2. Which town vould yal pass through if you travel by train from Mutare jo
Harare? '
A. Gweru B. Marondera Cc, Kadoma D. Chinhoy)
3. We cannot go to Nyanga by train because —————
A. there are many mountains
B. it is very cold
C. it rains all the time
D. there is no rail network
4. The capital city of Zimbabwe is ————- 7
Name the most suitable means of transport that can be used to transport
loads of coal from Hwange to indusines In Harare.
6. Name the raw material that can be transported by train from Mutare to

Harare.

8C. Public and private forms of transport and

communication

Transport

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 95 ---
in Zimbabwe people use differe |
transport fo travel from nloce te whe 7
rural areas people travel from one plac © to
another along foot paths. In order to ranse i

oods, ox or donkey drawn carts are Used
in areas with gravel or dirt roads, goods are
transported by motor vehicles. The main
towns and cities are joined by tarred roads
Large volumes of goods and people ee
nese roads. The tarred roads also connect as
Zimbabwe with other SADC countries. Anirial drawn cart

The fastest means of transport is by air. The main cities and resort fowns are serviced
hed by air. Air is the

by air. All other countries in and outside Africa can be reac
most expensive form of transport. Boats are used for transport in other countries.
However, in Zimbabwe they are mainly used in holiday resort dams. Fishermen
in Kariba use boats for fishing. We have big dams like Lake Chivero, Lake Kyle.
Orsborne Dam, Alexander Dam, and others where people use boats for leisure.

Public transport are all forms of transport open to public use. They carry anything
and anyone for a price. Private forms of transport are means of transport that are
owned by specific individuals for their own personal use.

Transport for specific goods and services

Form of transport

Goods/service From To
(Chiadzwa)
ect [Hwange [Harare Power Station [Wein ___
enor wen [corm
ma (Kariba [Harare Lorry |
[Boarding school] Bulawayo |
Homes [Hospital la |

Newspapers

ay
hes

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 96 ---
ication systems used in Zimbabwe. }),.
one, letters, newspaper and teleyjsi,,
and the drum to communicate.

of commun
one, cellph
smoke,
and private forms of communication, 7),
i and receive messages by telephon,.
ows public and private forms 4,

There are many different forms
most common are radio, teleph
In the olden days people would use

Nowadays there are a number of public
Mazoe Satellite station is used to transm
telex, and television. The table below sh
communication.

Forms of communication

Public Private .

Activity 3
1. In the grid below identify private and public forms of communication

os po[T
LE
LH
ia

ZInN

Kd

LN |e |

At [i [R|
‘ta ol.
Lu
y{R|

rr

28

Disadvantages

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 97 ---
1. Fillin the grid below using the most suitable mode of transport used in the
given situations

car aeroplane cart foot bus |

Mode of transport

Work
| Rural areas
| Zimbabwe China

2. The most suitable transport to carry school children is by____—__ -
A. cart. B. bus. C. lorry. D. train.

An email isa public form of communication. [True/False]

What is the difference between public and private forms of transport?
State the difference between public and private forms of communication.

aN

8D. Road safety

Road signs are developed to bring
drivers and other road users to exer
should take care of road signs because they help people and
of road signs and signals are robots, stop sign, give way sign,

order to road usage. These road signs help
cise the right behaviours on the roads. We
save lives. Examples
children crossing the

gn and rail road crossing sign. Pedestrians are supposed

road sign, humps ahead si
g traffic.

to use the right side always (in Zimbabwe). This way, they face oncomin
Below are examples of road signs and signals and their interpretation.

Children crossing the road



--- Page 98 ---
A. right

The zebra Cross
A. animals
On which side‘

%y

canned by CamScanner



--- Page 99 ---
Summary

The movement of people and goods from one place to another requires good
transport systems.

* Business negotiations are carried out through different means of
communication.

« Changing of life patterns ha

¢ The world, being a global village, has moder

communication.

The relocation of people because of work has led to the increasing need for

transport.
e There are different private and public forms of transport and communication.

5 resulted in the creation of new transport ways.
n ways of transport and

_ End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice
1. Which of these is a means of transport?

A. car B. phone C. television D. letter
2. |canuse a to travel from the city to the rural areas.

A. bicycle B. bus Cc. cart D. ship
3. 2 is not a form of transport.

A. railway B. car €. bicycle D. horse
4. In which form of communication do we not get written information?

A. letter B. phone C. fax D. telex
5. Atonne of maize can not be carried using a

A. truck B. train C. boat D. motorbike
6. One can go from Mutare to Harare either by road or by :

A. ship B. train C. balloon D. canoe
7. \In Zimbabwe, the most common mode of public transport is a

A. bus B. donkey cart C. lorry D. bicycle
8. Long ago people used a for communication.

A. letter B. drum C. radio D. cellphone
9. The fisherman at Kariba Dam use to go and catch fish.

A. buses B. boats C. trains D. aeroplane
10. A good road has eet

A. road signs B. bridges C. gravel D. pot holes

!

Structured Questi
Which side of the road do pedestrians u a

to get back at

e€ one reason why dri

e 7

ae I ors : - a rer
y Camscanner —


--- Page 100 ---
n.
4. List four ways of modern communicatio
CO) eerie cee
DD) ace esac eeeinrnlliae an
‘ | [4]
< | Oneal placate)” | |
5. What does each road sign mean?

[4]
6. Give one advantage and one disadvantage of USING A scotch cart as
means of transport.

Advantage oo. ee

Disadvantage

7. Explain the reason why we cannot go to Chipinge by train.
8. How is electricity transferred to our homes?

}
Total [25]

Glossary
Efficient —

irk ing well and faultless!
red time and Using the
ing that is working
Iven_ time. The

y, and Producing good results in +.

available resources.
well and Producing the intended resu!

wd

network system is effective in sendi

MMeans of things to use.

Effective a

=
a
,°)

=

Scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 101 ---
Work and leisure

You should be able to:

}, outline the Imponance of work

2. Identity careers In sport ane artes

3. stole leisure aclivities Invelving visual and partormlng ans in te ¢ Orrin
4. differentiate between « Ip roy whale ewid INap propane ie laure GEN sNes

What kind of work do the following people do?

a) a vendor b) ashopkeaper Cc) asculplor 4d) a potter
e) a soldier 1) anelectician  g) a fishermrnan
2, Which worker do you think of when you 566 these things?
a) a trowel d) athermometer g) a piece of chalk
bb) @ work sult 6) a tractor and plough
¢) a suil !) ahelrmet

a I Bat ne

ee eee

Key words

leisure livelinood unsuitable salary discipline
suitable performing artists visual artists incentive

Introduction

Work is any activity involving mental or physical effort done in order to achiev«

a result. The chores that we carry out at home or at school are also work. Leisure

is time that you take to rest, relax and do things that you enjoy. It is important ‘~
_ you to balance work and leisure. There are a number of things that someone ~ur
Phas during leisure time. These can be sports and arts, To other people, «ports and

the 4 Boove, work can also be
ore divided amongst people

home, children can be taking
Jen. Purents usually do the hard

Scanned Dy amScanner



--- Page 102 ---
ty \

a Mel edb

i

if

ar

Work at home

work and this can involve cooking for the whole family and chopping firewoon
with an axe. Families work together to maintain the cleanliness of the household
and to make sure they are able to provide for themselves (farming and taking

care of livestock). Below are some of the reasons for work.

¢ Livelihood — people work to get money. Money helps us to buy or pay for ou
basic needs (food, shelter, clothing, and water). It also helps us to pay fo
services like education, health, communication and leisure.

¢ Service - People work to do things that are of benefit to themselves, the)

society and the nation. Farmers, doctors, teachers, police and soldiers are

some of these people.
* Humanrelationships —- People work to satisfy the need for mixing and talking to

workmates, friends and clients (Customers).
* People work for personal development, job satisfaction, security, success and
happiness.
Every job isimportant because it contributes something to both the local communit:
and the nation. To contribute is to add value. Therefore, every job helps to make

Zimbabwe a better place.

The importance of each of the following jobs comes from what it gives to the
community and the nation. In the fable that follows, match the contribution of
bs in A with the correct service from B. |

each of the jo

ocanned by Camocanner


--- Page 103 ---
1) Farmer

2) Nurse

3) Dustman

4) Teacher

5) Carpenter

6) Engineer

7) Street cleaner

looks after ill people in hospital

repairs and maintains machines and engines
makes and repair wooden things

drives people to and from work

sees to the security of the nation

arrest those who break laws

collects refuse from dust bins

8) Driver helps people to learn to read and write
9) Doctor Produces food to feed the nation
10) Soldier

Cures people who are ill
makes steel window frames and door frames
collects rubbish to keep our streets clean

11) Mechanic
12) Policeman

Exercise 1

What is work?
Give two examples of work at home.

Give two examples of leisure.

Why do families work together? Give one reason.
Why do people work? Give two reasons.

9B. Sport and arts as a form of work

To some people, sport is a form of work because they get paid for it. The people
involved are full time workers in special jobs that have something to do with special
aspects of sport. The athletes in different sporting activities like football, rugby,
swimming and tennis take sport as work. All sport clubs employ a number of people
who help out with the different activities and games. People who can be employed
in sports are club managers, doctors, coaches and umpires/referees. There are also
engineers, carpenters, drivers, shoe makers and tailors who can also have their
careers in sport. All these people earn salaries and get incentives Through sport. A
salary is money paid monthly to a worker. The following table shows Zimbabwean
sporting legends in different disciplines. A discipline is a type of a _

Se

"

——

t
ee

oe i ae

ee Ct

Meng SOE Me UT Th ae ai
"Th Ug

fio F
bok ie eee

njani Mwaruwari

mm

* * ws
7 i 7

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 104 ---
i i tmoney. Art js ay
| their artistic skills to get m IS diviqa
Artis aTorm of work for those whe vavel arts. Performing art involves Produc,
into two areas, . oetry and acting. Examples of people invojy, \
and playing music, dancing, P Selmor Mtukudzi, Sandra Ndebele, Th,

Brown, | |
ini and Jah Prayzan.
Mapfumo, Jayz Marabini an sople for money.

on CDs, DVDs and books to p

ists i > following:
nclude some of the foll
y pautnetren who take pictures using og
e Artists who draw iis See coup ot bon aac
icles
: Gatscoonie the apes blacksmiths, potters, Carvers oN Weavers. The,
ie terns like axes and hoes, clay pots, hoe handles, baskets and Carpet.

ictic thi t money for their liveling...

artistic things that they sell to ge liNood

sone Bi hentave Gore up with workshops that employ upcoming artists <, 4
produce art in large quantities. Visual art products are usually found at art galie;..

and tourist towns like Victoria Falls.

1. In groups, discuss the different careers in sport and arts.
2. Collect pictures of sport and art celebrities in Zimbabwe and other countr«

Exercise 2

Answer the following questions in full sentences.
1. Who tuns the affairs of a sports club?

A. The manager BB. _ A footballer C. Thereferee D. The Captair
2. trains athletes in a particular sporting activity.

A. Acoach B. Amanager C. Anumpire D. Adoctor
3. Gee." re performing artists.
A. Albert Nyathi and Oliver Mutukudzi B. Mapfumo and Rebel Sold
C. Tsviriyo and Olivia Charamba D. Baskets and carvings
4. A_______ makes arrows and axes from iron.
A. builder ‘ B. blacksmith C. wood carver D. painter
- AE ip J€d into two areas, performing and visual arts. [True/False}
at di

otographer do?
9C. Visual and Performing arts as q form of leisure

Any form of work, §
artists have full time
During their spare fi
do these out of intere
spectator/audience ist
during their leisure time beg
visual and performing arts
leisure time. Some leisure Activities iq.

done part time is a leisure activity. Some vis
M Places like banks and Publishing companie
‘Ortists Or sportsmen/sportswomen. 1h
§ O way fo relax. In the same way, tl
miré the visual and performing ©
fefainment from that. In that wo)
ation for many people during the
IMUnity could be a show at the a"

|
scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 105 ---
gallery of paintings and sculptors, football game, cricket, theater performance of
a concert by a well-known musician or group.

some Common visual arts are shown in the pictures below.

Singing

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 106 ---
Find out the names of visual and performing arts facilities IN Zimbabwe
In groups, discuss the leisure activities you take part in.
Discuss leisure activities in your community:

a) for children
b) for adults.

N=

Answer the following questions in full sentences.

1. Leisure is
A. busy time B. free time C. bed time D. anytime
2. ana form a very important part of most people's recreqti,,
during leisure.
A. Work and leisure Ee and arts
D. Gossiping and drinking

C. Sleeping and snoring
3. is a game which attracts many people.
A. Tennis B. Golf C. Soccer D. Polo
4. People watching a game are :

A. an audience B. spectators

C. a congregation D. a crowd
5S. Children enjoy watching on J.V during their leisure.

A. soccer B. churchservice C. cartoons D. news

9D. Responsible use of leisure time

Although leisure is ours we must use it wisely. Wise use of leisure is responsible use c
one’s free time. Responsible use of leisure is shown by the value of the recreatior
activities that we choose. Such activities should teach us valuable behavic ;
and develop our personality (Unhu/Ubuntu/Vumunhu). in the right way; mentally
socially, physically and emotionally. It also teaches us to follow instructions, lea |
be disciplined, cooperate and be courageous. —

Some games teach us fo judge situations. These include chess, darts, netbal

handball and soccer. They also improve our various ills j itic

merge mathematical skills in additic
multiplication, subtraction Gnd division. Debate and public speaking improve ©.’
word power, sel cenifel and respect for other people's points of view. Di

drama and films encourage relaxation and excitement.

Responsible use of leisure
shown above. When somethir
Examples of suitable use of a
novels, playing games and Ww

‘eS selection of suitable leisure activities

taking part in sports and arts, reac!’
it of television. Unsuitable recreation’

VUATTTICU VY YVAlIOvUdIIcl


--- Page 107 ---
esa like drug abuse teach us bad things and behavior which destroy our
a gre ity. When something is unsuitable it is wrong. Examples of unsuitable leisure
activities are too much television, drugs, fighting, drinking alcohol and smoking.

Activity 4

Write suitable (S) or unsuitable (U) in front of each of the following leisure activities.
1. Vegetable gardening

2. Beer drinking

3. Vandalizing public property

4. Spending lots of time on WhatsApp

5. Flower gardening at home
6

7

8

9

]

Visiting the library
Drug abuse with classmates
Visiting the National Gallery of Zimbabwe
_ Playing soccer, netball or tennis
0. Playing games (traditional and modern games)

Exercise 4

Recreational activities should be chosen

A. carelessly B. wrongly C. carefully D. badly
2. Suitable recreational activities should our personality.

A. kill B. drown C. develop D. destroy
3 is a suitable leisure activity.

A. smoking B. reading a novel

C. drinking alcohol” D. fighting
4. Some teach us to judge situations.

A. punishments _ B. drugs

Cc. games D. excitement

5. Darts improve our mathematical skills in.

A. drawings B. shooting
C. writing D. addition and subtraction.

Summary at |
e People, work for livelinood, service, B uccess among
other reasons. i. ae

* Sport and arts are a form | Mate money and incentives

f recr



--- Page 108 ---
End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Valuable work Taules
A. shows that we have skills
B. pleases our parents
C. contributes to the community
D. uses all our time
A doctor is important in sport because

A. he is a spectator B. he treats injured athletes

C. he coaches the athletes C. he is a busy man
An example of a visual arts artist is a
A. sculptor B. musician C. dancer D. poe}
The time we rest and relax ourselves is ;
A. holiday B. leave C. leisure D. time off
Sporthelpstodevelop_ i,
A. strong teeth B. healthy minds and bodies
C. our school D. neat school grounds
The business of a sports club is run by a ]
A. coach B. umpire C. referee D. Manager
A company which produces sports equipment is
A. Van Heusen B. Caps United
C. Mighty Warriors D. Adidas
An appropriate leisure activity is
A. visiting the Victoria Falls B. drug abuse
C. breaking into people’s houses D. child abuse
A public festival where people play music and dance on the street |
A. Q traditional dance B. anorchestra
C. aluna park D. a carnival
—— 's an example of Performing arts.
A. Photography B. Writing C. Singing D. Painting

Structured questions
l. Define the following terms: an |

a) work b) leisure Z

2. Write down wee y \ re (2)
a) mene (2)
b) ,

3. What are the two thi ee ;
a) ©? They both begin with r

b)

(2)

Scanned by Camscanner


--- Page 109 ---
1 down two games that teach us to judge situations.
a

b)
5. Sport develops us in four. ways. Write down any two of these
a) We develop
b) We develop (2)
6. {i) What do we call people who are famous for playing soccer or acting in
films?
a)
(ii) Name one such a person you know:
b) in Zimbabwe
Cc) from any other country you know
d) Name the country ; (4)
7. Valuable historical items are keptatthe ss tj (1)

Total [25]

=  aperson who takes part in sports, for example, soccer, rugby
_ Slay and tennis.

canned by VLamocanner


--- Page 110 ---
Global issues

Objectives

You should be able to:

1. identify natural resources my
2. discuss the need to conserve natural resources.

1. What is afforestation? ;
2. List ways of conserving trees.

Key words

poaching haven
conservation dehorning: —

Introduction
Environmental conservation starts with every one of us. It is such animportant matte;

that affects the whole world. This means that it is a global issue. Conservatio;
means protecting our natural resources by carefully controlling and managir 9
them especially for the benefit of posterity. Posterity means all future generation

10A. Environmental conservation

Natural resources include land,
animals, water and vegetation.
For the benefit of the present
and future generations, natural
resources need fo be preserved.
When using these resources,
people need fo think of the future
so that the coming generations
can enjoy the same resources.
Most Zimbabweans have a clan
name which is often that of an |
animal. We call these clan names
totems. These clan names help

posterity foreign currency

Natural resources

rod
af ‘Oa ee

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 111 ---
IN Conserving animals becc DE
What i 1g animals be ©QUSe people do not eat an animal that is their totem
Jar ls your totem animal?

The Big Five

are retort sod with F variety of wild animals and birds. Five of its animals
and leopard. There are , vin These are the elephant, lion, buffalo, rhinocero
licenced to do so are lic eming laws against the killing of animals Only people
hunted or killed for their skin ton However, there are some animals that cannot be
an endangered animal t ay celh or horns. An example is the rhino. It is cet lcinthihe
hunt and kill it will le a pecause the numbers have decreased and continuing to
WIT will lead to its extinction. Here are pictures of these animals. Can
you name them? Talk about their local names too. Which of these animals is

called the King of the African bush? Why do you think it has been given this title?

The Big Five

Human activities that endanger wildlife

Animal poaching

The most serious problem facing our wildlife especially OUFr animals, is the problem
of poaching. Poaching is the illegal capturing or killing of animals, birds or fish on
government and private property. One animal that has been poached for year:
is the pangolin. It is in big demand in China and Vietnam where the meat is eaten

wr


--- Page 112 ---
The scales, blood and foetuses (unborn babies) are used for traditional medic,
Elephants are also killed for their tusks (two very long pointed teeth) that are m4...
of yellowish-white bone called ivory. Ivory is used to make things like knife han,
In 2013, 84 elephants died from cyanide poisoning. The rhino is also in great danga,
of poaching. The value of its horn has suddenly gone up and so Nas its UNlawf,
killing. Poachers are using modern equipment such as aircraft, very fast vehic)..
silenced rifles (guns), mobile phones and poison.

Need to conserve natural resources
i) Animals | |
Conserving our wildlife/animals is not an easy thing to do especially with
increasing demand for more land for agriculture, resettlement of people anc
urban housing. The problem of poaching makes this even more difficult. Belo,
are some of the reasons why we should conserve animals.

* Source of natural beauty. Our wildlife adds beauty and variety to Our

environment. ig
* Tourist attraction and source of foreign currency. Wildlife attracts dome:

(local), regional and international visitors (tourists). The tourists SPEN a lot o;
money during their stay in the country. The country earns foreign currency
which it uses to improve social services like education and health. Foreign
currency.is another country's money.

° Improves and promotes our international (world) image. Visitors see the beaut,
of the country’s wildlife and enjoy the friendliness and kindness of the loca
people. When they go back to their home countries, they say good thing
about our country.

¢ Promotes and markets our tourism and hospitality industry. Tourists eat qn
sleep in our hotels, guest houses and lodges. They Qive hotels business ar
help people to keep their jobs.

¢ Sourceoffoodand other products. When animals gettoomany, the governmen
may kill some of them and sell the meat to people at very affordable price
Elephant meat is sometimes eaten at national celebrations like Independen
Day. Elephant skin is very strong and is used to make leather products like bel!
handbags and shoes. Crocodiles are kept at crocodile farms, for example,
Kariba. Crocodile meat can be bought from supermarkets and is also serv
in many hotels. Some farmers keep ostriches. Ostrich meat is also server
some hotels. Crocodile skin is used to produce a variety of leather prod
like belts and shoes,

e Source of leisure and recreation.

ii) Land be Ge |
* Gives vegetation that helps with oxygen and fuel.
e Richsoil gives rich agricultural produc |
* Good health. iw

e Interesting and beautifuly
Survival of animals and vegetg

‘Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 113 ---
lil) Water

« Water is life (survival of all living things).
e Promotes good health.

e Rich vegetation.

iv) Vegetation

e Provides oxygen.

Beauty of the land.

Food for people and animals.
Cool shades.

e Medication.

Zimbabwe's National Parks and Safari areas
The government realises the importance of our wildlife to present and future
generations. It has reserved (set aside) large areas of our country for the
conservation of our wildlife. These areas are protected by law. They include
national parks, botanical gardens, safari areas and recreational parks. The map

below shows Zimbabwean National Parks.

Nyanga
National Park



--- Page 114 ---
National Parks =
1. Victoria Falls _ ee
» Mana Pools

. Nyanga ee

. Gonarezhou

- Matopos

. Chizarira

. Matusadona

. Hwange

The Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority

The government has a special department that looks after our wildlife. It is calleq
the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority. It falls under the Minist, V
of Environment, Water and Climate. Government has also established a Trust Func

Oo ON Am BW BDH

called the Wildlife Ecological Trust Fund (WET) following the poisoning of elephan}-
in Hwange National Park. The National Trust looks for money and resources for
conservation in Hwange and other National Parks. It works to
and Wildlife Management Authority.

gether with the Park:

1. Using the internet, research on Zimbabwean National Parks. Present YOU!

findings to the class.
2. Visit a National Park and write down the interesting things you see.

Ways of conserving natural
resources

Anti-poaching

The government has specially trained
people who take care of our wildlife.
These are called game rangers and game
wardens. They move around game parks
looking out for poachers and relocating
endangered animals. They also help
injured or trapped animals. Injured animals
are treated and safely retumed to the wild.

Game rangers

ocanned by Camscanner


--- Page 115 ---
Veroming
Det jorning is the removal of the

rF ino horn using a chainsaw. This
done to discourage poachers from
hunting the animals. The procedure
is painless and the horn eventually
grows back. This process is done

by trained people. Zimbabwe and
other African countries dehorn rhinos
as a way of conserving them.

8 D hornin
Education ‘i .
Teaching communities about the importance of our wildlife is the key in the fight
against poaching. Schools can form conservation clubs.

Relocation of animals

Endangered animals like the rhino can be removed from unsafe environments and
taken to havens around the country. This helps to protect them from disappearing
completely. A haven is a safe place.

Disease control
Diseases caused by d
diseases such as rabie
Qualified animal doctors called vet
especially those injured directly or in
diseases that may harm wildlife.

omestic animals can spread and kill wildlife. Likewise, wildlife
5 can affect domestic animals like cattle as well as people.
erinary doctors or vets care for wild animals
directly by people. They also help to control

Stiffer fines for poaching
The present fine for poaching a pangolin in Zimbabwe is US$5 000. However,

poachers are getting between US$7 000 and US$10 000 per animal.

International cooperation
The fight to conserve our wildlife requires the cooperation of other counties

throughout the world. Conservation of natural resources is a global issue because
it affects the whole world. 7

Activity 3



--- Page 116 ---
Game rangers and game wardens ____—" ‘|
A. poach wildlife

B. look after domestic animals

C. take care of our wildlife

D. are qualified doctors

The movement of endangered animals from un
environment is called ‘
A. haven B resettlement C. relocation —D. franspor!

A______ is used to dehorn the rhino.

safe to a safe, natura |

A. knife B. axe C. chainsaw D. hacksaw

The following are natural resources excepys. 2 =.

A. land B. vegetation C. plastic D. wildlife
is a wildlife disease that can affect cattle and people.

A. Malaria B. Rabies C. Measles D. Bilharzia.

Qualified anima! doctors are called :

A. surgeons B. veterinary doctors

C. physicians D. game wardens

Summary

Some animals are protected by law and they may not be hunted or killed.
Our wildlife beautifies our country, attracts visitors (tourists), creates jobs fo:
our people, is a source of food and other products and also provides leisur:
and recreational activities like angling, bird-watching and elephant riding
Human activities like poaching and veld fires endanger wildlife.

Education and training help in conserving wildlife.

Wildlife conservation is a global issue because it affects the whole world.

, End of topic assessment test

0 SEES Ta PO ee
/

_ Multiple choice questions

The is not one of tre big five. ;

A. giraffe Papeiion «~~. ..C. elephant D. buffalo

Animals, birds and fish thieves are called

A. criminals” B. poachers C. conservationists D. parine

Someone who's Visiling a place for pleasure is called a

A. poacher Wie mae! -— C. tourist D. spy

Elephants are mainly poa for their |

A. size ‘ee C. horns D. skin
pwe'lost 84.6 s because of

In 2013, Zimba

A. floods i C. fire D. poisoning |



--- Page 117 ---
6, The largest National Park in Zimbabwe is

A. Gonarezhou B. Hwange C. Chimanimani D. Mana Pools
7. The is called the king of the African bush.

A. elephant B. crocodile C. lion D. leopard.
8. is a wildlife disease that can affect domestic animals as well as

people.

A. Malaria B. Cholera C. Rabies D. Tuberculosis
?. Which of the following is an endangered animal?

A. Chicken B. Baboon C. Monkey D. Pangolin
10. An elephant's tusks are made of ‘

A. ebony B. ivory C. gold D. diamond

Structured questions
1. List the Big Five animals.

2. A poacher is (1]
3. Name two animals that are protected by law.

Why are rhinos dehorned? [1]
Where do we find Hwange National Park? {1]
Give four examples of Zimbabwe's National Parks.

S| a
5) ee a
Of ee EE |
iE ale li a [4]
| Total [25]

NOG

canned by VLamocanner


--- Page 118 ---
-nd of Year assessment test |

Paper 1: Multiple choice questions

1. To stop road Carnage we need to
A. drink and drive
B. use defective vehicles
C. bribe the police

D. use roadworthy vehicles and follow road rules
2. A tourist travelli

ng to Zimbabwe from Europe would travel by ;
A. lorry B. truck C. aeroplane __ D. tractor
- Traffic lights, humps, give way and stop signs help in reducing =
A. the police B. corruption C. pedestrians D. congestion
- The best roads to connect major towns should be roads.
A. gravel B. tarred C. muddy D. potholed
- The form of writing used by visually impaired People is called

C. internet

B. h
- Which of the following is not a form of transport used within Zimbabwe?

A. Motorcycle B. Commuter Omnibus

- Bus D. Ship
- Which of the following could

be a solution to the problem of speeding?
A. Speed traps and fines
B. Bribing the Police
C. Use of electric cars
D. Construction Of wider roads
- Which of the following Countries is not a member of the Southern African
) community (SADC)?

Mozambique D. Ethiopia

Sport, it is also the
€xpensive

_ ©. cheapes D. least Comfortable
10. T he most sulfable me | transport toferry q Patient from home

to haspitc

C. a train D

- A lorry
———_ iS no lon

means of communicati Er a populc

A. newspaper = B.
12. One reason why people
A. to earn a living
_ ©. toplease other peop

D. letter



--- Page 119 ---
13. Sport and arts are a form of work to those who through them.

A. get entertainment B. get salaries and incentives

C. get rest and relaxation D. waste a lot of time
14, People watching a play/drama in a hall are

A. spectators B. learners

C. an audience D. a congregation
15. Which one of the following is a visual arts artist?

A. A teacher B. A sculptor C. A doctor D. A driver
16. What do we call the time we rest and relax?

A. Easy call B. WhatsApp C. Leisure D. Bedtime
17. Historical items are kept in the ’

A. museum B. library C. school hall D. stadium

18. Physical Education develops us
A. physical and mentally
B. physical and spiritually
C. mentally and spiritually
D. emotionally and roughly
19. form a very important part of most people's recreaction during their
leisure time.
A. Work and leisure B. Sport and arts
C. Sleep and play D. Gossip and drink
20. Global issues like environmental conservation affect

A. Africa only B. Zimbabwe only

C. Europe only D. The whole world
21. Posterity refers to

A. our ancestors B. natural resources

C. future generations D. Zimbabweans
22. Which of the following is not a natural resource?

A. Land B. Water C. Vehicles D. Animals
23. Which of the following animals is an endangered species?

A. Dog B. Baboon C. Rhino D. Zebra
24. Which of the following activities endanger wildlife?

A. Bird-watching B. Elephant riding C. Angling D. Poaching
25 and training help in conserving wildlife.

A. Veld fire B. Education C. Poaching __ OD. Rabies

Paper 2: Structured questions

Answer in full sentences
1. Give two reasons why transport is impor
2. What is the difference between pri

j
tin our daily lives. (2)
port and public transport? iv
| Total [5]



--- Page 120 ---
(2)
y Rede sighs are important. Total if
care of our road sings? ) :
; of people who use our roads. Theletterse,mang
st the correct answers. /

Total (5)
(\\

Heys

> down one importance of work.
te down any careers (jobs) in sport and arts. Write two for each
Sport: __ and
_and MEE ee
Following leisure activities: /
nmuni and ; (1
be and , (1)
a Total [5]
7 (1),
hat claimed the lives of 84

Total (5]
Total [50]

Scanned by CamScanner


--- Page 121 ---
Ventures Primary
Heritage-Social

Ventures Primary Heritage-Social Studies Learner's Book Grade 4 has been developed to suppor the
content, aims and objectives contained in the New Primary Education Curriculum for Zimbabwe
._ It contains all the activities that the learners need to cover the Heritage-Social Studies Syllabus for

Grade 4.

. The book features:
\--* Logical sequencing of topics and lessons.
© Active learning and learner engagement strategies.

« Wholesome development of the learner.

¢ Colourful illUstrations that reinforce and communicate content. -

e Accessible language.
* Activities that balance individual and collaborative learning.
e An inter-disciplinary approach to learning about heritage.
* Examples drawn from everyday life.
* A Zimbabwean perspective as well as an acknowledgement of globalisation.
¢ Aglossary with level-appropriate definitions.
* Activities that encourage the learner to use modem ICTs in their everyday learning and at ho”

The Learner's Book is part of the Junior Primary learner's Development Series
__ completed with a comprehensive Facilitator's Resource Book.

| |
|
pierguooe 15°



