--- Page 1 ---
/ 2 | college press —

New Curriculum |

Ventures Primary

Agriculture \

Ei ado | Learner's Book


--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primary
Agriculture

Learner's Book Grade 2

i 3CKED nals RIMATY sri

TBR Away
02 0CT 297 |

ee CELLO 323 29

BA college press



--- Page 3 ---
Ventre: Primery Arrlenliers Grade 3 Losrners Bonk

CE 30 Sathald amd M. Maidlirnades 1057
© Wiysirneioms and design College Press Pubes {Fly Led, 20107

All rights reserved, Wo pant of this prblication may be reprodoced,
shared jm a retrieval system, or transmitted 18 amy fom
or by amy meenns, electronic, photocopying, recording.

ar atherwize, without tus price writen permission of the |
copyright holder oF In accordance with the provisions |
af the Copyright Ad, (Chapter 26:08), 2004,
Any person who does any unsitherised oct in relation ta this
publicatisa may be liable for crirmmal prosecution and |
First published 2017
Published by
Coflepe Pregs Publishers (Pvt) Lid
By, Boa 34046, Hasan, Zimbabwe:
Typessiin [13 pod Contury Gothic]
REMOTE 1 TI E5
The publishers keve made every effon to ree te comin holders, Hihew
have inadvertently overlooked any, they will be plensed to make the
MECEREETY Mvangaments of the rst oppor, |
Ii is {llega to phaneapy ay page of ibis Book without written permission from the pubdishers.
Printed and bound by Shumoni Mills Commsimicstions, Paow, Cage Toom
Ewin 127
|
|
|
il



--- Page 4 ---
Contents

Topic 1
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3

Tople 2
Umit 4

Topic 3
Unit 5
Unit 4
Unit 7
Unit B

Topic 4
Unit @

Topic 5

Unit 10
Umit 11
Unit 12
Umit 14
Unit 15
Unit 14
Unit 12

Topic &

Unit 18
Unit 1%
Unit 20
Umit 21
Topic 7

Unit 22
Topic 8

Unit 23
brit 24

Introduction fo agricullure iis esses sss esses |
Importance of QgrCUIUTE crises cress senses se smsmesssss emsnes ©
(la LT url {a [a I nT
Safety In agicUulure. cen RT I

ClHmale and Jona Ue... ee eeoericcressasrrse res snrtsnmss assess sare on I

Co | y re
SOll...voeene. ceetmcsenserssssrassersssasaces stones tid

tall types...

A
Soil fertility. .. EI wang
Soil erosion. ........ i oem mo pi Cragin RCE | TS Sp iv
End of term 1 assessment test A | RLY 0288.2 ceriendn
hay =
(LT = SOUTER re. I |
LR T= atm r= 0s | {nn Fi |

introduction to the study of plans.. PPS SOC -.
Flant nutrition... .-. RE SR. | J
Vegetable CIOS ee erresemeeessnss LAR LR RE Rg mrs pare mer re gw ee pn &3
Ll fd Cn rerereeais rene minim wed af
OCIA 188. ocr or EF bnnns amd Fas as ea 0
Omaomeantal horficulture, dA oF Sm orm er mn nin BEE ve unsere FEA
Za Ti=r  . PPR PRIY
End of term 2 PAP test. eeveanaan emesis adsaaieineiessas eeeies nan 85

Ly fie 1
Infroduction ta the study of animals... SPER TIRE.
FN ae | (WL Te Ef mr we RE RE 95
bape [Tw fa Tmd fm] nT ed on 100

FY Td tem meeen rena anne waa SR 1 5.

Farm implements and machinery... coccinea
Farm implements and machinery... ccm esses | 10

Agribusiness... ocean. LEE East i ene res reser rar rene an wares 116
Agribusiness... FEET, Ciivass ET Sr NE
End of year assessment test........... seas PAPHOS SHI SS 123


--- Page 5 ---
Leamers should bea able ba:
define the tern agriculiure

state general importance of agriculture to themselves

identify basic garden tools

state the uses of basic garden tools

use gorclen tools safely

state ways of preventing common hazards when using gorden fools.

Bal ail al al a

Introduction
Pecple and animals need agriculture ta ive, Most of the food we eal. the clothes

we waar, materials for constructing shelter and furniture come fiom agriculture. So
agriculture i important because it gives us food, clothes and money.



--- Page 6 ---
Unit 1 Importance of agriculture

~ Flashback
Identify the items in fhe Figura 1.2. |

Key words

Rue feldcrops  gardenicrops field |
domestic animals vegetable

| Ls



--- Page 7 ---
What is agriculture?
Agriculture is the growing of crops and keeping of animals,

The land we grow our crops on is called a field. Crops ore plants grown by people
for food or for sale. Plants grown by people on a large piece of land are called
field crops. Those grown in the garden are called garden crops.

sorghum, sunfiower, millet, maize, soya beans, tobacco. cotton. sugar cone are
examples of field crops. Cabbage, lettuce, carrots, rape. green beans, nyvevhe/
ulude are examples of vegetables, A vegetable is a plant or a part of a plant used
as food.

All animals which ore kept at home are called domestic animals, We can keep
animals like sheep, goats, rakbits, chickens, donkeys, and cattle. These provide us
with food, money and power for ploughing our fields and transport.

Activity 1

Ir reins:

1. List the crops you grow at home for food.

2. Do vou grow any crops for sale? If vou do, list the crops.

3. What food do we get from the domestic animals we keep at home?

Importance of agriculture

Gives us food: we get food from
crops such as maize and beans,
vagelables lke cabbage ond camots,
and frults like apple: and maramba/
umkhemeswane. We gel meat,
args and milk from animals. Braad, oud
cheese, sugar and peanut butter are fey
Erv-prociucts of agriculture, |

By-products are things we got [Eee
after processing the products of 8 Aa)
agriculture. Food mokes our bodies IIEEER
tiecithy and able to fight against
disenses.



--- Page 8 ---
Products i By- produc fs : |
|rmealie real to rrake sadza/isitshwala |
toute rake bread _ |

sovd beansfsunfiower

Gives us clothes: people grow cotton ond keep sheep and cattle to make
clothe:. Cotton produce: cloth which is used to make dresses, shirts and
frousers. Sheep have wool which iB used to make jerseys. scarfs ond hats,
Cable skins are used to moke leather which is used to make shoes, belts and
jackets, 30 most of the clothes we wear come from agricubiure,

Gives us Jobs: peopls
work on farms and
industries. On forms,
pacple plough, weed,
Irigate and  horvest
crops of well as look

after the animal.
People work in industries

where they make Se
bread, sugar, leather, |
and clothes as well as
prepding seeds ond
making equipment used

in agiculhes. People .
oils work in transporting
agricultural produce
fram the foams to the
inclustries.



--- Page 9 ---
Gives usshelter: atfimes ogriculfure
invalves the growing of trees such
as gum trees and pine trees. These
frees are used to support the roofs
of the houses wa live in. Agriculture
helps moke shelter for people and
cnimals.

Gives uz money: when pzople
grow crops and keep animals and
zall them. they get money which
they use fo buy other items used in
day fo day life.

Activity 2 |

The growing of crops and keeping of animals i called

A. cropping B. ogriculture  C. business D0. gardening
Which onirmals give us milk?

A. cow, goat B. doe, hen C. bul. cat D. donkey, dog
Agriculture is important because [| gives us .

A. food, money, clothes B. clothes. cor, bicycle

C. bicycle, motorbike, grinding mill D. food, cars, shops

Which animals give us clothes?

A, chickens B. rabbits =. goofs 0. cattle
How does agriculture help make shelter for people and anirmals?
The crop which gives us rmaterdal for making clothes is ©



--- Page 10 ---
Let's play and learn!
Crossword puzzle: Fill in the spaces with the comet wards.

The first letter is given Far vou.

1. Growing of crops ond keeping of animals
2. A place where crops are grown
3. Agriculture creates j Tor people who work on forme,

4. Agriculture provides us with m——— which helps us to buy things,

Dawn
[| 5. A crop that gives us cooking oil
| 5, Most of thet we eat comes from ganic Ulture

Summary
*  Agnculture is the growing of crops and keeping of animals,
* Agriculture is important to individuals because it gives food, shelter, jobs.

clothes, and money,
+ Animals kept by people are called domestic animals.



--- Page 11 ---
=F

Crops grown in the field are called field crops.
Crops grown in the garden are called garden Crops.

| Glossary

Agricultura the growing of crops and keeping of animals

Domeslic animals — animak kept by people at homes

lond where crops arg grown

crops grown in a fleld, for example; moize, groundnuts, |
and many others

plants or parts of plants used as food



--- Page 12 ---
Farm tools

# ond iol

sickal

Figure 2.1 Farm tools



--- Page 13 ---
7) Key words

shallow culfivalion: inventory record
wesding willing

Introduction

Tools are important because they make wark aasier. Each toal is mode far a
parflcular activity. For example. plants are watered using a wotering can. If plants
lack water they wilt, Wilting is when plants become limp because of lack of water,
therefore, the farmer should water the plants using o watering con. A hoe and a
handfork are used for weeding. This 1s removing unwanted plants from cultivated
lard.

Garden tools

Wwe grow a variety of plants in the garden. We use garden tools to camry out
different tasks. Digging, planting, watering and weeding.

Look af the pictures baicw. Which fools are being used and what are they being
used for?



--- Page 14 ---
Figure 2.2 Uses of garden fools



--- Page 15 ---
The following table summarises the garden took and their uses.

Table 2.1 Garden tools ond thelr uses
[= U=es
Digging
Moking ridges
Weeding

- Leveling beds
- Harrowing gross

- Digging
«Loading moncre or soil

- Loading marine
-  Shoveling soil from a trench

Digging in gravel sci
Loading gross

Sholay cultivation
{This is the loosening of the sol in a bed)
Weeding close to plants

~ Moking straight ridges
- Making lines in the beds



--- Page 16 ---
Cutting grass

— T - cCutling grass

T Coemying manure
Camying gorden produces

Watedng vegetables

| | | Spraying pests In the garden

All tools at home or at schoo must be written down in an inventory record. This is
a book where all fools are recorded. When Hey cre given out for use they should
he recorded in a tool issue record. This is clone to avold losing Tools,



--- Page 17 ---
| Activity 1 |

Design a class inventory record book, Record when vou fake out or return fools |
for practical lessons.

Example of an Inventory record

Tool | Name of Date Dale Signature
a returned

Wilting is when plants

A. are very fresh B. are too many in the garden
C. lose freshness D. are drying
Selecta list of digging tools.

A. hos, spade, garden fork

B. ocx=, sickle, siasher

CZ. hose pipe, tank, engine

0. hae, hand fork, shovel

Which tool is used for shallow cultivation?

A. hoe B. gorden fork C. hond fork
Tools used for digging are H nl BT RE
Write down the name of each tool in the picture,

al

Draw the following tools,
lc] rake bl hos (c] sickle



--- Page 18 ---
Drama on tools

Formulate a drama on a heme set Up where the family gost to the fields oF garden
and uses differant tools, while they observe safety. Whar activites did YOU SOY
out and which tools dic VOU Usa?

Fun with words
Fill in this crossword purse

| I
11
| — }
Fo

Across
I. Atool used to cary garden produce

2. A tool used to load manure

3. Atool used to water venetobles

Down

4. Atool used to make ddges
3. Atool used to cut gross
Summary

Tools mainly used in the garden are:
* Hoe for digging and weeding,
* Rake for levelling and removing rubbish.



--- Page 19 ---
| Glossary

Watering con for watering.

Spade for digging moist soil,

Sickle for cutting grass.

Carden line for making straight ridges.
Hand fark for shallow cultivation.

Inventory record a book whererecords of tools on the form or schaal are
done

Shallow cultivation — loosening of soilin a bad

Weeding the removing of unwanted plants (weeds) on cultivated
land

Wilting when plants become limp because of lock of water



--- Page 20 ---
q Unit 3 safety in agriculture

othing when using chemicals in a

griculture

) Key words
protective clothing safely

injure anger



--- Page 21 ---
Introduction

arden tools are useful but if they are used wrongly people can injure themselves.
The following pictures in Figure 3.2 show the correct and the wrong ways of using
took. For the safety of the user, the correct way of using tools should be followed,
Safety means any action that can be followed fo protect the wser from risk or
danger. Danger is anything that may cause harm to o person.

Safe use of garden tools

Wrong way (X) : Right ath) (v)

Do nt cut grass with o siasher while piel
are closer ta others

Der mot throne tools of cihers

Do not wie chemicals without protective Do wear safc clothes when using
clothes chemicals



--- Page 22 ---
Dox not use a hos whils someone is mond Do dig while others are not near

Do nat leave the rake facing upwards Do use a noke while # is facing Sownwarnds |
| Figure 3.2 Comact ond wong ways of using foals
|
|
i when using garden fools:
| * Do not throw tools af others.
| = Do not threaten others with garden tools,

= Do not cut grass while telling stories and looking af fhe other people other than
the gross you are cutting.

Do not dig with someone standing or sitting in front of wou.

* Do not scatter tools in path ways,

i Do notleave a rake focing upwards,

«  Daonot spray chemicals without wearing protective cloming.

Protective clothing are clothes thot prevent the user from being hurt while handling

materials that could harm them. We use protective clothing when using chemicals,



--- Page 23 ---
Activity 1°

Your teacher will give you hoes and let you dig a very small partion in the
garden where you will plant vegetable seedings.
| You are encouraged fo observe safety.

Which fool should not be left facing upwards?

A. hoe B. rake CC. shovel LD. axe

A culling tool which can cut your fingers when you use it without care

5 0

A. slasher B. axe C. sickle LC. hoe

Which tool is used when spraying plants with chemicals?

A. spade B. knapsackspraver C. hes D. sickle

Select two digging tools and explain how to use therm solely,

What 5 a sickle used for?

state whether the staternents are True or False,

[al Tools should be thrown to ofihers,

[b)  Arake should be left in pathways while facing upwards.

[cl When you want ta spray the garden using chemicals, you should wear
protective clothing.

summary

satety should be practised when working with farm tools. This reduces injuries. To
ensure safety:

« do not dig while someone is in front of you.

* do not spray without weanng protective clothing.

» cut grass while your mind ond eyes are at the grass you are cutting.

= hold your slasher tightly as it may slip ond injure other people.



--- Page 24 ---
Danger something that may cause ham or injure 0 person
Injure - todo ham onone s body
to be out of danger

End of topic assessment test

SN =
= —_ —

1. Select a digging tool from the diagrams.

pitiple cholce

which of the following lists has cutting fools only?
A, hos, spade B. sickle rake

CC. sickle, slasher DO. sickle, hand fork
Which of the diagrams has the comect tool use?



--- Page 25 ---
. Took are recorded ife—m—m——.
A, an inventory record 2. textbook
Z. a financial record book, 0. a tool issue record
Which set of animals gives us meat?
A. snake, cattle 8B. cattle, chicken
C. dog, snake DO. lizard, dog
Which picture shows someones using tools in a dangerous wer?

which set has importance of agriculture?

A. food. busiress, cars

B. food money, clothes

iC. cons, bicycle, motorbike

D. money, cars, flald

Select a field crop from the list.

A. cobbage B. lettucs ©. carols sunflower

Which animal gives us eggs?

A. Cow B. goat C. chicken . figh
10. Which animal gives us leather?

A, cattle B. chicken C. cat dog

Structured questions

1. Fill rw wing the words given below.

colton, maize, shovel, milk, wheelbamow, rake.

A COW OIVes Ls

Some af our clothes come from material produced from
Mealie-medl comes from

We use g fo load manure in



--- Page 26 ---
(2 The keeping of animals and growing of crops is called in
13. what ls wiong with the persen in the picture? [A

=

4, Which tool shauld not be left facing upwards and why?



--- Page 27 ---
| Objectives

Figure 4.7 & rainy doy

Leagmers should be able to:

1. identify the four seasons in Zimbabwe
2. state the months thot fall under each season
3. identity signs from their lec environment thot indicote the seasons,

Introduction

There are times when will be raining, other firnes if will be hot and other times it
will be cold. These changes in weather mark the changes in seasons. The raining
pencd is an example of 4 season. In Zimbakwe, we hove four changes that take
place in a year, maeoning that we have four seasons.

= |



--- Page 28 ---
Weather

Unit 4

il
|

") Key words
| shelling post rein segsons mcize ork:



--- Page 29 ---
seasons of Zimbabwe

There are four seasons ina year in Zimbabwe, Namely rain season, post rain season,

1 cool dry season and hot dry season.
Rain season cover the months fiom mid-November, December, Jonuary,
[summer] February up to mid-March. The main activities Tn this season are

ploughing, planting and weeding.
Also dunng the rginy season, we hove such creatures as crickets
and fruits like rmazhorfe.
Post rain season covers he manths from mid-March, April, until mid-May.
[autumn Activities include harvesting, making maize cribs, Fruits like
tsebvufumishwonkela are common, Mice are also comman,
Cool dry season covers the months of from mid-May, June, July to mid-August.
[winter) Common activities: shelling maize ard thrashing rapoko. Trees
shed off their leaves.
Hot dry season cover: the months from mid-August, September, October to
(spring) mid-November,
Common activities include gardening. Trees have new leaves.
Cormmon fruits of this season are mofohwe /uxakuxoky and
maiombo/umkhemeaswone

Rain season (Summer) Fost rain season (Autumn)

Indicabors and achivifies

Trachor ploughing, people weeding. all -
crckeis, mozhanje, rdinieg, Animal Indicates and aclivifies
such os frogs are present, Ank ore

searching for food, Harvesting, constructing moze cribs,

mice, Eubvwfurkhwonkels



--- Page 30 ---
e=———y
_—

i

Coal dry s2oson (Winter) Hel dry season (Spring)

Indicators and achvilies Indicators and activities

Shelling maize, pounding rapes, people: Treas with new shools, people walking

putting on jackets, Trees wilh no leaves, witty urnbselos on lo protect [he son's

Very cold temperatures. haat, morohwe/umokaoky,  makambof
LATER &rma@sw ane,

Figure 4.3 Activities In different seasons of the yeor

In groups, pick aut which months fall under each season from Figure 4.3. You |
should lsc pick out the activities dane in each seasan.

Go outside and identify signs fram the environment which show the season
You are in,

Exercise

We get rains in

1. SEO.
A. sping B. winker Cc. wmmer Do outumn
2. During winter, the weather i
A, raining B. werycold C. veryhof 0. trees have hew

shoots



--- Page 31 ---
In which season do we find crickets?
A. winter B. spring C. summer 0. autumn
The four seasons of the year are;

List activities done in summer,
Fili Ir the missing information.

rrid-HovernbBer, vo... mid-March
micl-hay, June. July, mid-August
mid-August... mid-November
mid-horch, April and May

Let's play and leam

Rearrange the following words to show that you know your agriculture words that
are related to seasons.
mmersu; amuinu; tiwner rignsp: ujne, aym -

summary

The tour seasons we have in limbaobwe are:

summer: the rainy season;

aviumn: post rainy season which means after the rain season;
winter; cold season; and

spring; hot dry season

Glossary

Malze crib of structure made to store maize soon after harvesting,
before sheling ik done

Posi rain season the season that comes offer the rainy season

Season - a pericd or time In a year where there is different
weather

Shelling removing maize grain from the cols

Threshing to separate grain from the plant stalk



--- Page 32 ---
End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Which of the following is not a season?

A. summed B. July CT. winter DO.
Winter is found in the following months except

A. June EB. July C. February Do August
Ploughing, planting and weeding are activities common —_

A. winfer B. summer C. autumn DO. spring
New leaves on frees mark the end of _ ond beginning of
A. spring, summer B. winter, spring
C. summer, wirter D. summer, spring
Most frees dry and shed off their leaves In which season?

A. summer B. auturnn C. winter D.
The people in the picture show it is time.

sprig

spring

A. SUmImer
wirfer
oti

ow

D. spring



--- Page 33 ---
(7. The people in the picture show itis.

- Spring
winter
Summer
. autumn

8. The activity of weeding in a maize field is common in
A. summer B. winter C. spring 0. autumn
9. The harvesting of maize is common in
A, summer B. autumn 2. winter D. spring
10. Which season do we receive most rain in Zimbabwe?
A summer B. autumn C. winter C. sping

Structured questions
1. Fill in the table on the missing information on seqsons,
Season Months

al.

cl] Autumn

November, December, Ja nur, February.

say

Moy, June, July

2. Which signs indicate that summer is approaching?

3. Which animals are common in summer?

| 4. What causes frees to shed off their leaves?



--- Page 34 ---
Objectives

Flgurs 5.1 Sal

Learners should be able to;
dafine sil
Identify local soils

identify materials vsed for making compas]

make a compost heap

define soil erosion

ideritify signs of soil erosion in the local environment

introduction
Soil is the rmaternial of the earth on which we [Ive on. Plants grow in the sol and our

animals live on the soil. For us to survive an this earth, we need the soll. We have to
take good care of the soil.



--- Page 35 ---
ele lor CODES
organic matter ‘organisms.

importance of soil

Sail can be defined as the mixture of erganic meter, air, water and minerals.
Organic matter is made up of the remains of plants or animcls, cil is important
because it has mony uses, Crops are grown in the soil, The animals we keep feed
on gross, which grows in the soil.

Lacal soils

There are three main typas of soll, Figure 5.2 above shows the three types. There is
clay sail which has small, fine particles that stick together when they are wet. Clay
is also used for moulding pots.

There Is also sand which has large parficles, The large groins make the sand soil
coarse, Coarse means that the particles are rough and loose when you fel nem
using your fingers, When we mix clay with sand we get loam sail. Loam soil is the
best sail for growing crops because it is ferlile which means it hos enough nutrients

far plants fo grow well,


--- Page 36 ---
i] by

| Activity 1

Let us go outside ond look of the soil around our school. Use your practical
book to record what you ssa, and eam.

» What is the colour of the soil af vour school?

+ Find some water ond pour on the soil. Does it stick to your shoes?

+ 5 the soil sandy, loom or clay?

Activity 2

Getinto groups, Let us have boys and gifs in each group. Find some containers
to fill with sail.

Collecting soil samples

« Group 1-3andy soil

= Group Z-Loarm sail

«Group 3-Clay sol

Mow you should record the following in your practical diory.

a) What is the colour of your soil?

} bi Are the particles big or small?

Exercise

|. What do we call soil which is deh in nuirients fo make plants grow well?
A. fertile soil B. sandy soil Clo soil D. rwufrisnts
. Give the type of soll which sticks to things when wet,
A. sond B. clay C. loom D. ferlils
The soil with big grains is called
A. clay B. sand C. fertie D. loam
. What is the other use for clay
List three soll samples you have studied.

ec)
‘Which soll type is beast for growing crops?
. Why is this soil best far growing Crps?



--- Page 37 ---
Summary

There are three types of soil which are sand, clay and loam.
A mixture of clay and sand gives loam soil.

Thee frees and grass grow well In good soll.

Loam soil is the best sail for growing crops.

* ® & # B®

Glossary

Clay soll small soll particles that stick together when they are |
Coarse — rough

Ferfile © = soll rich in plant nutrients

Loam soil a mixture of sand and clay soils

Organic matter decayed rernains of plants and animals

Sandy soll — soil with large soil particles



--- Page 38 ---
Unit 6

Soil fertility

Lo! ~~. Key words

compost Stover site “Farfilify |

Infroduction

Plants grow well in fertile soils where they get enough nutrients. Plant food found
In the soil is called plant nutrients. When we add manure info the soil, it becomes
fertile. This addition of manure improves the ferility of the sol,



--- Page 39 ---
Compost making

Decayed natural materials roke a compost, Compost manure is made in different
ways. We use different types of materials for making compest. The matericls are
collected from the fields. Maize stalks, wheat straw, soya bean stalks and fobaceo
rermains are some of the materials suitaile for making compost,

Materials suitable for making compost should easily rof when put an the compost
hegp. The suitable materials are listed below,

Vegetation materials

These include: free leaves, maize staks. groundnut staver, wheat straw, soya bean
stover, vegetable remaing from the garden, kitchen waste. Crop remains are
called stover,

Animal matter
Thess include: dung and droppings from domestic animals such as cattle, goats,
sheep, rabbits, pigs and fowls.

Weeds and stover are put in pigsfies and fowl runs as bedding. This Is to keep the
fowl runs and pigsties clean ond worm, The mixture of animal dung ond droppings
with bedding mokes: good manure,

Selecting the site for a compost

Select an area where there are no crops being grown. We con select the site
under a tree where there is 0 shade. A stite is a selected area where o particular
activity wil takes place, The shade protects the compost from the heat of the sun.
Compost should be made near the garden, It will ibe easy to carry the compost
to the garden. We should select o site near water, so that the compost heap is
watered easily.

The site for a compost heap should alse be protected from farm animals as cattle
can spmetimes fromple over the compost heap.

Making a compost heap

A good compost heap is made in avers as Follows:

Layer 1 - grass, maize stalks. vegetable waste, bedding from pig sties and fowl
FIM,

layer 2 - manure or ashes

Layer 3 - soil, water

The layers are repeated unfil the compost heap is one metre and twenty

cantimetres 1.2m) high.



--- Page 40 ---
mire stlks

rCEure:

I Figura £3 A compost heap

Looking after a compost heap
Things to do:
Activity Reasons
« Wolter fhe heap every twa weeks Woter helps the materials to red quickly
= Cleon weeds around the compost heap Weeds remove malsture from the Campos

Tum the compost heap after four weasks Turning helps all overs To rot guickly

Activity 1

Marking the site for a compost heqp.
steps

1. Meosure one metre width

2. Menosure six metres length

3. Put pags of the comers

4. Stretch a sting gleng the pegs

5. Mork along the sting

Record the width and length in your practical book, Draw a diogrom to show
, The pegs. Also show the lines marking the edges of the compost site. /



--- Page 41 ---
Activity 2

| Music and dance
songs with materials used to make compost.

We are the compos! wander,
We waste no time
Just two, three, four weeks
And we are rotfen
We were once green
We ware ance alive
We had fruits
Alwerys feeding them
with water they dronk
Ando lot of food they afe
Fromm fhe sail below
All the food we gove ham

1. Which material BE not suitable for making compost?
A. manure B. groundnut stover
C. maize stalks 0. plastic bogs
What is the use of compost?
A. provides plant nutrients B. to dump animal woste
C. to dump clover 0. bedding
. ‘What is bedding material used for?
A, covering the floor BE. cleaning
C. feeding broilers D. absorbing water
. Why should a compost heap be sited under g free?
. Why should a compost heap be made near the garden?
. Give one of the materdals used fo make a compost.

summary

« You hove used moterials such os crop remains ond manure fo make a
compost, soo compost isa cheap source of plant nutrients.

«Using compost improves soil fertility. This maxes crops to grow hedithy.

+ When making compost, animal manure is added. This makes the compost rot
quickly.

= Animal manure also improves the quality of compost.

» Water aise halps to make the compost ref quickhy.



--- Page 42 ---
i
TF |
|

Ll
)

Animal matter
Bedding

decayed material of animal origin
litter put on floors of animal houses
manure from a compost heap

being fertile
position or place for a compost
crop remains

walk on dnd crush



--- Page 43 ---
Unit 7 Soil erosion

( ) Key words
sit sollerssion gullies

What Is soil erosion?

Sail erosion is the washing away of the top soil and if happens when there is heavy
rainfall, wing and through animal and human activities. When the rain water flows
on the ground, it comes soll particles with it, If this continues, a lof of soil is washed
away. This is called soil erosion.



--- Page 44 ---
Signs of soil erosion
Higns of erosion are the presence of mud in water, exposed plant roots, presence
of gullies, and sill in dams.

| ©] Mud in flowing water b] Exposed plant roofs
] Lt
] =
14
| 1 somefimes when hao mains fall, water
Anwes along lone areas and wash way large
Look at the waner flowing on the ground amounts of soll. Facts of frees ore sean
when the sol is bare, The water is muddy exposed out of the ground becouse of
when it is washing away soil particles, erosion. When the soil is bare, gully erosion
will fake places.
if c! Presance of gullies d] Sili being washed away from the
fields

Sometimes woter flows strongly causing sand hot is washed owoy gother at rer |
apenings which are known as gullies, bE omics.

Fig 7.2 signs of soil erosion



--- Page 45 ---
How animals and human activities couse sol erosion

| animal pathway: when animals
move around they fromple on
the ground, This loosens the
soil and enables erosion fo
take ploce.

over grazing: when animals |b
groze they remove the plants
and grasses that hold the soil
together. This makes the ground
bare and mokes it easy for soi
to wash away when it ngins or
when if is windy.

| Streambank cullivalion: when
people cultivate on
streambanks they loosen the
ground around the stream or
river.

When it rains the soil is ecslly
washed into the stream or river.
This will result in silfing of the river.

=]

d] Deforestation: the cutting down
of frees leaves the ground
Bare. The sail 15 exposed and
without the tree roots that
hold the soil together, it can
be easily washed away by rain
wober and wind,

Activity 1 Field trip]

| Make a fri p to an Irigation scheme in your area.
Things to observe: exposed plant rects, deep cattle tracks, muddy moving
\ water and silt,

| Activity 2 Observation
1. Lock for areas where rain water is lowing.

2. Is the water clear or muddy?
3. Are there any gullies?

| NB: Use wvour practical books to record the observations you have made.



--- Page 46 ---
| Exercise

. Sand on stream bed i called
A. silf B. cloy
C. arcrvel D. stones
. What are the openings in the ground caused by erosion called?
A. silt pifs B. gullies
C. exposed plant roots D. potholes
- Streambank erosion is coused by
A. growing crops B. cutting frees
C. heavy rains DO. strong winds
. Mame a place where soil erosion can be observed,
. How do animals couse soll erosion?
How can we protect soil from erosion?

Summary

Soil erosion is the washing away of the top soll and it happens when there js heavy
rainfall, wind and through animal and human octivities,

Signs of erosion are the presence of mud in water, exposed plant rots, presence
of gullies, sit washed away from fields and silt in dams.

Glossary

Sit - soil and other material that s carried by flowing water
and deposited in the fiver or dam
Soll erasion washing away of soil

En as

[- = —

Multiple choice questions
Which type of soil has fine soil particles?
A. sond B. clay <. loam DL. silt
Mame the type of soil used for moulding pots,
A. red soil B. sand Cc. loam LC. clay
Which material for compost making comes from animals?
A. wheat stover B. gross C. kradl manure 0. free leaves
State a use of compost.
A. improves soli feriliby B. provides water to plants
C. makes soil colourful DC. controls soil erosion



--- Page 47 ---
Which animal does not produce manure?
A. dog B. pig C. cow CO. chicken
and Cosas sol ardsion,
A. animals and trees B. grass ond people
wind and water 0D. water and soil
tManure from a pigsty is called
A, litter B. straw C. bedding CO. dung
Why is of compost heap mode under a kee? Because it should be
A. kept coal B. protected
C. near the garden OD. watered every week
why should o compost heap be made in layers?
A. touse all the materials B. to keep wet
CZ. so thot it rots quickhy D. easy to make
10. What is the suitable height of a compost heap?
T B. 1.2m C. 1.5m

Structured questions

Fill In the blanks with the most suitable answer.

Treas and plants grow in the
sil has fine particles,
Loam sail is a mixture of and clay,
The colour of the soil of our school is
Mornure makes the soil
Crop remains are called
Match the type of erosion with the place where it is found. Use this ist;
river banks farming land siltation raindrop erosion

IE Lo =
[ria TEES ir

| bl Stream b bark erosion



--- Page 48 ---
Unit8

End of Term 1 assessment test J

Multiple choice questions
Section A
Answer all questions
i. * 1. What is the importance of agriculture from the lists?
! AL money, food, clothes
{ B. gef cars, buy shops, dig wells
C. buses, bicycles, motor bikes
0. irigofion, watering, food
, 2. Which of the following is a sign of erosion?

I A. covered ground B. brown soils
ZC. axposed roots [too many bronches on frees

identify types of soil from the list.
il A. river sand, pit sond, muddy
| B. sand, loom, day
il C. stones, quarry stones, ruddy
0. organic motter, stones, muddy
Most frees do not have leaves and some are having new leaves, Which season
Is this?
A, winter B. autumn CC. summer D. sping
The activity in the picture betow is common in

= 2
ET
-

SUITES C. autumn Dn. spring



--- Page 49 ---
The tod in the diagram below is
used for —

A. Comying monure
B. digging
C. weeding
0. watering

A. SUMIMEr winter D. autumn



--- Page 50 ---
8. Choose o set of cutting tools in the diagrams below.

7. Which animal gives us eggs?

A. Cow BE. pig C. goat 0. chicken
10. Which soil fype has large sail particles?
A. lor sol B. fine soil C. clay 0. sandy
| 11. Which type of soil is used for molding pots?
A. sond B. loam CZ. clay Cv, sill
12. Chocse the material not suitable for making compost,
A. manure BE. leaf mould C. maize stalk  D. sand
13. Why is a compost heap made in layers?
A. fo look nice 2. saves spoce
C. fo rot quickly 0. to use less maternal
14. What is the suitable width of g compost hean?
A. 0% m B. Tm C. 1.2m OD. 1.5m
15. Why should a compost heap be tumed?
A. keep moisture B. fo odd nutrients
C. torof foster LC. maintain the height

16. Which set of materials gives us material for making clothes?
A. cotton, cattle, sheep
B. maize. cai, sunflower
C. ben, groundnuts, shesp
0. saya bean, rabbit, maize
17. To make straight ridges one should use a

A. rake B. wheelbarrow CT. watering con D. gorden line



--- Page 51 ---
18, What is the person in the picture doing wrong?

A. He is not wearing protective clothes,
B. He ls too short,

=. He is spraying well,

OD. He is not smiling.

. The foo! used when you wont fo control pests in the garden is ;
A wheelbarrow
B. knapsack sprayer
=. ahoe
0, spades
. Crickets, amocimbi and mazhanje are common in — )
A. summer B. winter C. spring D. autumn
. Winter falls under which of the following months?
A, Movember, December, January
B. May, June, July, Augost
CZ, Movember, Jonwary, February
D, September, October, November
!. Which tool should be greased before using it?
A: hoe B. spade Co sickle 0D. wheelbarrow
. Crops which give us mealie meal forsadza are.
BE. maize, sorghum, rapoko
2, sunflower, roundnuts, sugar cone
D. sunflower, peas, beans
. How do you make sure vou arg using a hoe safely?
A. Digging while you are looking somewhere else
EB. Digging while thers is no one near you
C. Digging using ana hand
DO, Digging while your eves are closed
. Post rain season 1s the some a3
A, winter EB. summer C. spring

= pe—1


--- Page 52 ---
Li

mL Saa—

Structured questions

Section B
| Answer all questions

la] What is;
{il agriculture [M1
{ii} scl
iil) soil erosion?

|b] Choose any tool used in the gorden. Write the name and the use of the
tel. [2]

|a} Which two common materials are used when making composi?

lo} List three common soils.

[a) {i} write down the names of the four seasons.
fi] What activities are done in summer?
fii} What comman sign shows us that winter is near?

[a) What is a compas used fart

(o] What ore the signs of erosion?

(=) Why are animals important in agriculture?

. Match the gorden tools and their uses.

Garden tool

= wheslbarrow shalkyw cultivation
garden lime SreRib beds
id) hond fork



--- Page 53 ---
Objective |

Learmers should be able to:

1. state fhe uses of water in agriculbare

Introduction

POEM

Water] Water! Water!

Water is life

Plants need water

water is needed by animals
People need watlar

Water, waoler you ore precious
Without you

Me life In plants

Mo life in animals

Me life in people

Thank you Lord for giving us water!



--- Page 54 ---
Water conservation

Key words

cansenvation wetering  imgotion



--- Page 55 ---
Uses of water In agriculture

arganisms need water to survive. Water is very important in agriculture, and to the
life of people and cnimals. Water is important for the following:
I « watering vegetables,
= drinking by animals
v migafing fields
+ for fish farming
«cleaning agricultural equipment
+ used in industries
= used in cooling engines in cars and tractar used on the farms.
Wailer needs to be conserved. Conservation is using water wisely without wasting
il. Storing water is also a way of conserving Tt, so that we will use it for watering
and irigafing, Watering is dons on small pieces of land and we use buckets or
watenng cons. lmigatlon is done on large pleces of land ond we use sprinklers and
hosepipes. Water iB conserved in tanks, doms and borehales.

| Water is the liquid which forms the rivers, dams. lakes, seas and rain. All living

see the pictures below and identify the uses of water in agriculture.



--- Page 56 ---
Activity T BI ] oo yo

In groups, discuss the uses of water in your communities and also the general
uses of water. You can mime uses of water and others say the use after |
observing the mimicry. |

Your teachar will demonstrate how to water a vegetable bed using a watering
can. After that, water the vegetable beds in the school garden.

| Exercise
Ea Fram the poem in the introduction, what three things need water?
a [ | )
N (b) ;
1H (c)
List three uses of water,
what is happening in each diagram in Figure 9.37
Nome two sources of water,
What is water conservation?
0. Summary

water is used in agriculture for:

+ drinking

= wotering animals

« watering small gardens

= rigating large fields

* cleaning agricultural equipment
Ia » mixing with chemicals for sproving and keeping fish among other uses,
im" Water is conserved in dams, tanks and boreholes for future use,

| Glossary

Conservation — Using resources wissly
| Watering putting water in a bed wing o bucket, watering con or
hosepipsa.

Irrigation putting water in a field using any imigation mathod,



--- Page 57 ---
[End of topic assessment test

Multiple chelce questions

1. Which af the following is not a use of water?

A. drinking B. irigation

C. for petrol 0. watering flowers
2. Choose a watering tool.

A, tank B. hose pipe

wheel barrow D. cup
3. A domestic use of waolkeris —

A, irrigation B. cleaning Industrial seguipment

C. wieashing clothes 0D. moking roads
4, When we use water in a small garden we call this

A, watering B. imgation

C. dripping [. fiooding

5. Imigation is when we
A. water small pieces of lond EB. water large pieces of land

C. water the garden GC. plant vegetables
4, When watering we normaly use
A. a wheelbarrow B. knapsack sprayer
=. tank 0. woterdng can
7. When irigating are Used.
A. Buckets EB. watering cans
C. sprinklers [. wheel barrows

Structured questions

1. What is water? [2]
2. Uses of water in agriculture re : and _ : [3]
3. Mame three sources of water used in farming. 131
4,  whot happens to crops if they are not watered? [1]
5. Where can we store water for farming? [1]



--- Page 58 ---
Plants

Objectives

Lesgrners should be able to:
1. identify plants within the local environment
2. stote local organic sources of plant nutients
3. identify local vegetables
4. classify local vegetables os indigenous or exolic
=. Identify local field crops
4. identify local fruit frees
7. define omarnental horticulture
3. identify ornamental plants
¥. define torastry

ciate uses of trees |

Infroduction

0

Plants are important in [fe because they help us to get oxygen. We use plants as
food, medicine and some are vied to make our homes lock beautiful,

Flants provide us with fibres for Making cloth, rope ond paper, Some provide fuel
and also shelter.



--- Page 59 ---
Unit 10 Introduction to the study of plants |

Flgure 10.2 A mango free

Begs

Key words

Plants within the local environment

The environment has a lot of plants. These include grosses, frees, and shrubs, Trees
are plants which have hard sterrs that grow tall. Shrubs are small to mediom sized
bushes that have multiple stems near the ground. Grasses are thin and they have
soft stems.


--- Page 60 ---
Types of plants

Trees have long/ffall frunks that supports branches above the ground. Most trees
are woody and grow tall and strong.
We use trees for different things. Trees provide us with:

+ pales for building = oxygen for breathing
= fimber to make furniture = paper

+ medicines and remedies

Shrubs

Shrubs are plants with smaller and numerous stems. We find most shrubs os bushes
In our community, 3ome shrubs lke the bougainvillea hove flowers. We use them
to decorate our yards and mark boundaras, Some shrubs are used os hedaess os
mast of them have their leaves all vear round. Some shrubs are herbs. Herbs are
plants with leaves, seeds or lowers used for food, medicine or perfume.

(Grasses

These are plonts with narrow long leaves ond thin stems that are jointed. Some
grass plants produce food, Barley, maize (com), rapokeo, rice, sorghum, wheat
ond millet are all grasses. Grasses that grow tall ars colled tufted grasses, These
are often used for thatching and are harvested to make hay. Runner grass does
nat grow tall, it moves and covers the ground. This type of grass is often used os -
lawn or fodder for cotile and horses, =

Activity 1
Go around the school, ond take a small branch from any plant and say tha
| name fa the plant. Use the local names where necessary. J

Activity 2

Lock for manila sheets. cut them info Ad size. Dry the leaves in a shade so that

they do not lose their colour. After drying them, paste the leaves on the manila

sheet, Write the nomes of the trees and bushes from which you took the leaves.
\atate the uses of these trees and bushes in your community.

Activity 3

Eo home and research on the importance of each plant you have picked
from the garden, field or orchard |



--- Page 61 ---
Wild loqual Monkey crange
rufyeve fudge FLERE mulamba

small leoved Mul bush
CHUL

|

|

| Wild spinach Msasa | aur plum
mos imbuyo C munhiengen

|

|

Figure 10.3 Plants within the local environment

Indigenous plants are plants that are atginally grown in a country.
Exotic plants are plants that are originally grown in foreign coun



--- Page 62 ---
What is the name of this trea?
A, Msasd . Sour plum
C. Crange free . Water-berry

w What is the name of tis shrub?
I ’ A, Small leafed fluff bush . Bougainville
a C. Poor man's spinach . Sour plum
& shrub hos
A. thin and soft stems B. hard stems
wm C. na leaves Cn multiple stems near the ground
| what is the difference between a free and a shrub?
bs List Four common plants found in your area.

summary

There are different types of plants found In your area.

There are 3 main types of plants, frees, shrubs and grasses.

Plants originally found in a country are called indigenous.

Flants originally found in foreign/other countries are called exotic,

Glossary

Shrub —- oo plant which does not grow more than 2m and have mony
branches.

Tree

a plant with a long trunk.



--- Page 63 ---
"Unit 11 Plant nutrition

Figure 11.71 Different types of manure

Powbock -

think plants need for,

Key words

organic matter plant nuthsnts marine

Introduction
Like animals and people, plants also need food, They fake their food through the
roots, The food is called plant nutrients.

The cammon nutrients which feed plants are nitrogen, phosphorus and potash
(potassium). There are many sources of plant nutients, these include Morus,
plant stover and fertilisers


--- Page 64 ---
| Figure 11.2 shows the animal and the monure it produces.

[| | Local sources of plant nuirients
un
bi
a EB

hen Chicken rrsnune

Agure 11.2 Shows the animal and manure | produces

= Most domestic animals produce dung which is used a: manwre. The manure is
from the food taken in by the animals. The food is usually organic matter, Organic
raatter is living maternal such as grass leaves and crops, It is important to keep
calle, goats, sheep, rabkits, chickens and donkeys becouse their waste gives us
rnonure which we con use in our gordens. A campost is made of organic matter,



--- Page 65 ---
Cote manure best for field crops such as maize, sorghum,
rrilllet ele.
garden <rops such as rape, viscous,
tomatoes
flowers

| Chicken manure 1s bestfor gorden crops such os rape, viscous,
tomatoes, ono: atc.
ficwers

beast for field crops such cs maize, sorghum, |
irilet atc,

garden Crops

flowers and lawn

Exercise

1. Which animal gives manure?
A. lizard B. cat CC. chicken
2. Compost is made up of
A, plastic, stover and cattle man ure
BE. stover. cattle monure and rubber
o, stover, colle manure and kitchen waste
0. plastic, stover and rubber
3. Plants take plant nutrients as thei
A. food
B. manure
C. compost

For questions 4-4 choose your answers from the following:

cottle, phosphorus, chicken, nifrogen, goat, organic mater, potash
4. The three nufrients found in manure are \ flats
5. Three types of animal manure are . cirich
| 6. Any ving material that decomposes is called



--- Page 66 ---
Summary

+= Plants need nutrients to grow well,

«  Nonure from animals is called organic manure,

= When we heap grass. leaves and any other material that decomposes we
form compost manure, which is required for providing piont nufrients,

Manure — animal waste which contains food (nutrents] food for
plant growth |

- | Crganic matter anything that can decay
| Plant nuirlents ~ food for the plants



--- Page 67 ---
Vegetable crops

Figure 12.1 Vegetable crops

Flashback

indigenous exofic relish



--- Page 68 ---
Infroduction
vegetables are used os relish or part of a meal. Relish is anything that we eal

soclrofidtshwala with. Vegetables that hove been always grown in Iimbabwe I
| are called indigenous, Those that come fram other counines and are now being
) grow in our country ore called exotic vegetables. Figure 12.2 shows some locally
ne available vegetables, |
- | Exofic vegehlables Indigenous vegetables
a) viscose Bb} coulifiower : i
Fo pr _ a) pumpkin leaves

Bb bicck jock

| ryavhefulude

J,

a} fomatoss

| | Figure 12.2 Exofic and indigenous vogetibies

I Local vegetables

L Most vagetables are grown in the garden. There ars different parts of a vegetable

thet can be eofen. Vegetables are classiled as exofic or indigenous. Exotic
= vegetables are those brought from other countries and are now being grown in alr
country. Examples are rope, cabbage, tomatoes, onion, spinach, cova, letfuce
and camcis. Indigenous vegetables ore those that have atwoys been found In our
country. These may be grasses, shrubs or frees growing in our areas but can be
used as relish, Examples are pumpkin leaves, spider flower leaves fnvevhe fulude),
black jock (tsinefinzala), wild spinach {mowa] okra (dererefidelele], and baobab

We can grow most vegetables all year round in a garden. Most vegetable require
constant watering and attention. in Zimbabwe most vegetable crops grow well in

or |



--- Page 69 ---
sandy loorn soil and do well in cool and warm temperatures. Too much heat ond
too much cold 5 not good for vegetable crops. Too much waler and a lack of
water is not good for vegetables as well.

Some indigenous vegetables are only available during tha rainy season. They grow
naturally, although we can grow them in a controlled environment, These include,
spider flower (nyevhe/uude] wid spinach fmowal, black jock (fsinefinzala) and
rvshrooms. These normally sprout naturally during the rainy season.

Activity 1
Use Figure 12.1 to answer the following guesfions:
1. Which vegetables are leaf vegetables.

2. Which vegetables are roof vegetables.

Activity 2

Collect indigenous vegetable seeds and sow them out of season to see if they
can grows, If they grow, encourage the growing of these out of seqson,

. is on exotic vegetable.
A. A. Spider Tower leaves i. Black jack
{. Cabbage 0. Poor man's spinach
: i= an indigenous vegetable.
A. Cobbage B. Block jock
Cc. Lettuce BD. Carols
3. We can grow most vegetainles
A. In summer B. mn winbar
LC. throughout fhe year 0. in autumn

Match vegetables of the same category (indligenous/exotic)
Block jock cabbage

Lettuce carrots

Wild spinach ~— baobab leaves

Spider flower lees -— Cove

Tomatoes — pumpkin lecves

Mame three exotic vegetables and three indigenous vegetables



--- Page 70 ---
Summary

« Vegetables are clossified os indigenous and as exotic, indigenous are those
that grow naturally in our fields. Exotic are those that are planted in the
garden.

+ Exotic vegetables include rape. cabbage, onion, tomatoes. beans, spinach

y and cova,
* - Indigenous vegetables include nyevhe/ulude, muchache/amakake,
mubaora fishokoio, rowa/fimbuya and mutsine fC uc Uzo,

Glossary
| Indigenous anything criginating in a country
. Exofic Imported from other countries
" Relish - anything that is used to eat sadza with
“



--- Page 71 ---
Summary

» Vegetables are classified os indigenous and as exotic. Indigenous are those
that grow naturally in our fields. Exofic ore those that are planted in the

garden,
= Exotic vegetables include rape, cabbage, onion, tomatoes, beans, spinach
. and covo.,
} « Indigenous vegetables include nyevhefulude, muchacha /amakaka.
muboora/ibhokolo, mowa/imbuya and mufsing/ucucuza,
| Indigenous - anything originating in a country
: | imported from other countries
" Relish - anything that is used to eat sadza with



--- Page 72 ---
Key words

legume ~~ coshaop staple food

Introduction

Field crops are grown in the field Thay ore usually stage food crops or cash-crops,
Mask field crops give us money.



--- Page 73 ---
Common craps crown by people in their fields are crops thot provide staple food.

Local field crops
Staple food is food thot people in an area saf most of the time. People also grow

cash crops in their fields as field crops. Cosh crops are crops people grow ta sale
| and get money. Maize, rapoko, sorghum are grown because they make medlise-
gl meal which is used to moke sodzofisishwaln. Sadza/fisikshwala is a staple food in
= Zimbabwe. Cotton, tobacco ond sugar cone are grown for export. This means
: that people sal these crops outside fhe country and moke money. Some crops lee
ground nuts, sunflower and soya beans dre cosh crops sold to the local industries
where they are used to moke cocking oil.
Activity 1
" | Identify the field crops in figure 13.1.

‘ | Activity 2

i | Visit a local farm that i ner the school. Identify crops grown there.

Tt}

. Create an agricultural comer in the classraom. Bring crop samples from home |
| and place them at the agricultural comer, J

. Which list of crops can be used to produce mealie meal?

| A, sunflower, Maize, cow peas B. maize, sorghum, ropoko
C. maize, beans, groundnuts 0. maize, sunflower, round nuts
i 7. Pacinut butter is obtained from

th A. maize B. round nuts

o. groundnuts LC. vegetables

. Cooking oil is obtained from
A. Cow pens BE. groundnuts CO. rapoko D. somghum

. What are the three field crops vou know?
a) _ bs). c)

5. Mame three crops that give us staple food in Zimbabwe.
. Moma three cash crops sold outside the country,



--- Page 74 ---
Summary

» Crops grown in the field are field crops
* Some figld crops are staple foods

Some field crops ore cash crops
Glossary

export = selling of things outside the country.

Legume - a crop which bears seeds in pods.



--- Page 75 ---
Fri
"i

J!

Unit14  Orchard/fuit frees

Figure 14.1 Local frult ress

ge AT a = Ep —— j je——— S111, INL on ji Ti

) Key words

Falgadatel rs exofic fraes

Introduction

Fruits cre on important part in peaple's diet. They are rich in essential nutdents such

as vilamins, mineral salts and calcium, As a result we need to take care of fruif

trees to ensure our supply of fruits.
Local fruit trees
Frat trees bear fruit which con be eaten by people, Frult trees are usually grown

in an archard. You find that most schools hove an orchard, with exotic frult ress,
Below are some of the examples of local fruit rees.



--- Page 76 ---
Crange tree uchd free

Bianca irse

Margo las



--- Page 77 ---
HMaoarijles ree

LT
LE]
ruta
Figura 14.3 Indigenous fui trees
-


--- Page 78 ---
wast Indigenous fruit trees bear fruit in summer, Summer is good season for fruit
trees as there would be a lof of water, Other fruits like guavas, masau/amosowa
Bear fruit during the post riding sedson.

indigenaus fruit frees cre found in certain oreas. This is because that would be the
area they originate from.

| bananas

 Mazowe ranges
Buhera rin

Leamers to go in the school orchard ond name the fruit frees they have seen. |
\ Identify some fruit frees that your teacher will shim you.

Bring fruit seeds/seedlings from home. Now fry ta plant the seeds in the school |
\ orchard. Continue caring for the plants.

Fruits are an important part of our. .

A. orchord B. gardens C. diet 0. culture
Mast bananas n Zimbabwe are grown in ;

A. Chipinge B. Honde valley CC. Mutare 0. Mbare
Fruits are important for people's diet because they are dehin

A. agiculfure B. water C. nutrients 0D. orchard
Fruit frees are grown in on

Mame any hwo fruits you know,

Give three regsons why fruits are imgortant.



--- Page 79 ---
Summary

»  Fruils are important four our bodies because thay supply vitamins.

= Fruit trees we find in the forest are called indigenous frult frees and these
include mutohwefuxokusoky,  mutombafumkhemeswane, munhengeni,
| muzhonjefumdliowusze and muhachofumkhuna.

* * Frit trees which were brought from other countries ond which are now
being grown in cur country are exatic uit frees ond these include mango,
i. apple. orange, and banana.

Glossary

Exotic trees —- these ore trees imported from other countries and
are Now growing in our country
Orchard a place where fruit frees are grown



--- Page 80 ---
Unit 15 Ornamental horticulture

Figure 15.1 Ornamental plants

Fie

nN Key words

~ Omomental  Horiciiture

Cur homes and schools need to be beautiful. How can we make ow school or
hime look beautiful?


--- Page 81 ---
FA

I

al A Forme with flowers araund Bb] A school with decorative shins

Figure 15.2 Using omamenial plants to beautify homes ond schools

Horticulture is the growing of vegetables and orchard crops. Ornamental means
decorative, Ormamental horticulture is the growing of decorative plants like shrubs
ard fiowers. Figure 15.1 shows some common omoamentdl plants, Common lowers
like Marigold, Dalio fiower, Christ's thor are found on most schools ond homes.

There dre also shrubs which beaufifies homes or schools, for example, golden
duranta. and bougainvillea.

Chaist's thorn ) Golden duranta dhs



--- Page 82 ---
Rovgainvillaa shawl

Bring flowers from your home and plant them. Water the flowers. Keep caring
| far the flowers.

The growing of vegetables and omamenial crops is refered to as

A. CIGFONOMY B. horficulture C. field crops 0. oil crops
Identify ornamental crops from the: list.

A. dalig, marigeld B. maize, beans

C. cabbage, camols D. pecs, beans



--- Page 83 ---
Identify fhe shrub in the picture.

A. golden duraritg B. green durgnta
C. bougainvillea 0. Christ's thom
What is ornamental hoticultura?

Name one decorative shrub you know.

Why do we grow flowers?

Summary

s  Drmaomental means to decorate.

= Ornamental plants are plants used to decorate a place.

« Horticulture is the growing of vegetables and omomental crops.

» Ornamental horticulture helps our homes and schools to look beautiful.
s We can sell omamental horticulture produce,

Glossary

Ornamental - anything that is used to beautify or decorate,

Horficulhure the growing of vegetables, frit frees and armameantal
plants.



--- Page 84 ---
Figure 14.1 Gum free planialion

=

Forestry Plantation

infroductlion

Trees are important to people, animals and the environment. People and crirmcls
rely on trees, for the air they breathe.

Forestry

Forestry is the growing and caring of frees. We grow frees an very large dreds of
land. This land is called a plantation, plantations are bigger than fields, We usualy
have gum plantations, ping plantations, cyprus plantations. Flontations can be
fund evenywherns in the country, but they are commen in the Eastern highlands,
that is Mutare, Nyanga and Chimanimani.


--- Page 85 ---
We Use grow gum, pire and cyprus trees becouse they grow tall and straight.
This makes them useful for moking poles ond straight long planks. We also use
sucalvotus frees to make paper. We take care of indigenous forests with mopane,
mahogany, teak and mukwa because the frees have hard and strong wood. We
vse wood from indigenous frees to make fumiture.

| Uses of frees

Treas are important becouse they give us:

oxygen wa bredth »  tmiper for roofing ond fumiture
«firewood * food - fruits

poles {or fencing

Fig 18.2 Uses of frees

Paper to make books
|



--- Page 86 ---
Activity 1
Visit a nearby plantation ond observe the frees thal have Deen grown thers,
Discuss how theses frees can be used, )

Collect teads from different trees and plant them. You can also get gum free |
| seedings and part them.

When trees which are not fruit trees ore planted in a large figld, the field is |
called a :
A. orchard B. flower C. planfation [. shruky

Which tree is out of ploce?
A. gumiree B pine free C. mango ree DL cyprus ree

which is a set of plantation frees?

A. gum free, pine free . mango tree, orange free
££. msasd, mopans B. cabbage. rape

Name three types of frees which can be grown for tirnker

Give two uses of Treas,

What is forestry?

Summary

» Forestry is the growing and caring of frees.

«Trees mostly grown in plantations are gum frees, pine trees and Cyprus trees.
» Trees are grown in a plantation,

a

Trees are useful in that They:
- Provide wood

- Provide oxygen

— Provide fimber

- Provide poles

Glossary

Forestry

|

the growing and caning of frees.

a large piece of land where frees are grown.



--- Page 87 ---
How much do you remember?

select the wards from the word puzzle

i fo Jo fo fo Iw in fe fe fu fo la fn [nfo fwlo fr [u]
LE TE
NEANANNA ANNAN

oo
PP A PP
HEE

ole Je Jo Ja Jn Je Jo fo Jo Jo JoJo Jo Jule Ie
a bo Le Je To fe Ts fu Jule Ju To fw fe fe fu Ja Ju

Find the following
June
Legumes
A crop which [s the staple food for Zimbabwe,
A word that explains the growing of crops and keeping of animals.
A pioce wheres crops are grown.
The four seasons of the year,
A month which most areas start receiving rains.
A use of frees.
A taal used for digaing.
. A tool used for removing rubbish or leveling beads.
. A tool used to camy garden produce.
| Importance of agriculture.
An animal used for security at home.
. Thing: which decay.
. A place where gum frees ore planted,



--- Page 88 ---
16, A plant which grows up fo dom.

17. Nutrients supplied by manure,

18, Uses of water,

1%. A tool used for cutting trees,

20, A crop used fo make cooking cil,

21. A plant grown by people and taken care of by pecple.

 Moliiple choice questions

Which plant is not common in most of our local environment is Zimbabwe?
A. peoch tree B. date tree C. gum tres
The following are organic sources of plant nulfients except _
A. cattle manure B. chicken manure
Cc. compost manure D. compound 0
Which vegetable is out of place?
A, pumpkin leaves B. coulificwer
<. block jock D. spingie pod
The following are exotic vegetables except
A. poomnan's spinach EB. rape
C. spinach D. cabbage
3. Choose a crop which is not a local isd crop.
A. sunflower BE. maize C. wheat 0. carols
which of the following is not a local fruit free?
A. Oranges BE. apricot <. ovocado 0. borana
The growing of crops which add beauty to an area is called
A. agronomy B. horficulture
C.  omamental horticulture OD. gardening
Three of the following are ermamerntal plants except
A. golden duranta B. bougainvillea shrub
CC. marngold 0. rope
The growing ond caring of trees is known as
A. orchard B. horticulture
C. forestry D. field cropping
10, Which of the following Is not a use of frees?
A. for electicity poles B. for furniture
C. forimigation OC. for controling ercsion

0. mango tree


--- Page 89 ---
Structured questions

11. aq} List 2 commen vegetables.
b) Give ony 2 indigenous vegetables,
13. |g} Why ore trees important?
Ib) What can you use flowers for?



--- Page 90 ---
| Unit 17 End of Term 2 assessment test )

Multiple choice questions

Section A

Answer all questions
| 1. Which of the following plant is out of place?

A. maize B. sunflower C. miargold D. sorghum
2. Which plant does not belong to the Oro?

A. mango BE. apple =. mobela plum DO. avocado
3. A plant with leaves seeds or lowers used for food, medicine or perfume is

Called a _.

A, shrub BE. herb frees D. flower
4. Which of the following is out of place?

A. spider flower B.  camots C. rape LC. egg plant

5. Under which class of vegetables do the following belong: nyevhe ulude.
mowafimbuya, and mukine/ucucuza?
A. exofic vegetables
B. indigenous vegetables
C. omamental vegetables
| D. horiculiure vegetables
6. Rape, cabbage, covo and anion are referred ta as _
A. indigenous vegeiaties
B. exotic vegetables
C. omomental vegetables
L. cash crop vegetables
| 7. Which lst comprises of local fisld crops?
A. rapoko, sorghum, millet
B. wheat, apples, bananas
C. duranta, marigold, maize
0. gum. mango, avocado
8. The growing ond caring of tress is called

| A. horficulture E. forestry
| ©. cmamental cropping LD. agriculture
?. Poles. oxygen, fire wood are uses of :
A. vegetables B. fruit trees  C frees DL. flowers
10.When frees are grown on d large area this is called :
A, orchard B. plartation
C. horticulture DC. simamental



--- Page 91 ---
| 11.Choose o sef of ornamental plants only

13. Which list has exotic fruits only?
A, oranges, bananas, apples
B. mazhanje, monkey orange, manga

C. oranges, matomba, mango
0. mangs, Bubvy, mazhonje
14, ‘Which animals give us monure?
A. dog. cat, snake
 B. cafe, chicken. goats
D. dog. cat, cattle



--- Page 92 ---
15. Manure provides to plants.
A, sugar B. salt CZ. nutrients o. fityre
16. What tool do vou use when watering In the garden?
A, spade B. woterdng con C. rake D, shovel
(17. The water for imigation comes from
A, shallow well B. stream C. dam 0. spring
| 18. Which list comprises of organic manure anly?
| A, campound 0, cattle manure, urea
B. cate manure; goat manure, compost manure
i | CL ureq, compound C, compound D
0. chicken manure, ureq, goat manure
19. Which of the following is nof suitable for making compost?
A. leaves B. plosfic 2. gross 0. stones
20. Trees Usually grown in plantations are
A, pine, gum, Cyprus
BE. pina. grange, banana
CC. gudyd, mango, ool
D. pine, guava, orange
| 21. Apples, banonas ond MongQoes ane
A, indigenous fils
B. exotic fruits
C. omamental fruits
D. garden fruits
22. hocha/umphafa. mazhanje/omozhanje and motochwe fuxkokoxoku are
A. exotic fruits
B. omarmental fruits
C. indigenous fruits
DO. orchard fruits
| 23. Which stoternent best dascribes amamental horticulhore?
A. plonts which flowers
B. growing of decorative plants
C. growing of vegetables
i D. growing of mit trees
24. Ornamental plants are. i”
A, plants which give us fruits
i B. plants which are decorative and give beauty to a place
C. edible plants
D0. vegetable plants
25. Most indigenous forest frees hove wood,
A, hoard B. soft CC. straight 0. long



--- Page 93 ---
Structured questions

Section B
Answer all questions
1. a} Water in agricukhune is used for _ and [3]
bl When watering vegetable bedsyou sea [1]
c] The main source of water for Irrigation is the : [1]
2. al Give one example of o tree, [1]
br] List two ways which make plants important,
(i)
(ii) [2]
<] Plants which are tall and have o hard shkem are called [1]
d} Plants with too many branches and can grow up to two metres are called
’ [1]
3. a} Hutsents usually supplied by manure and fertiliser are
[i]
(ii) .
(il) —— KE!
bl The word organic refers fo things thot con decay, Give hwo materials that
can be used to make a compost. [2]
4, a} define the follcwing termns:
(il ormamental hoiculture
li) forestry
lil] indigenous vegetables [3]
kb} Mame any two decorative shrubs you know. [2]
5. Q| Identify the frults in the diagrams [i], (ii). {iii). [3]



--- Page 94 ---
Animals

Agure 18.1 Domestic animals

! | Objectives] | |

Leamears should be able to:
1. list uses of domestic animals
| 2. identify bypes of animal feeds
5. clossity fhe animal feeds os natural and commercial
name the types of small livestock

define apiculture
distinguish bees from other insects



--- Page 95 ---
Unit 18

Introduction to the study of animals |
Introduction

Domestic animals are kept for various uses. Animals are kept for meat production,
aad production, power, milk and selling them for money.

3 Key words

breed amusement commercial


--- Page 96 ---
Uses of domestic animals

Domestic animals are useful ing number of ways, Some are used to provide meat,
some to assist in working, some os pets among mony other uses.

Figure 18.3 shows uses of cattle. State the uses of cattle shown in the pictures.

Figure 18.2 Uses of calfle

Chickens are used for producing meat ond eggs. Chickens that lay eggs are
called layer hens.

Goats produce meat and milk. Their hides ore used as sitting mates,

Sheep produce meat and wool

Cattle produce meat (beef). leather, milk ond pull wagons and ploughs.
Cottle used for milk are called dairy cattle,

Ducks produce meat and egos

Pigs produce meal which is called pork


--- Page 97 ---
Other uses of domestic animals

al

Figura 18.4 Uses of dogs, horses and donkeys

Figure 18. 4 shows more pictures of demestic animals and their uses. Domeasiic
animals can be used to assist in doing work in fields, camying heavy things and
trarsport, Sometimes the animals are usad for amusement. Amusement is when
activities are dene for fun or entertainment,



--- Page 98 ---
Table 18.4 Domestic onimals and the work they do

More of anime Work done

Commerclal uses of animals

sometimes animals are used for making money. This 5 called commercial use
of animals. There are farmers who k2ep animals for sale and amusement shows.
some farmers breed animals such as horses and dogs for sale. Horses are used for
transport and for horse racing. Race horses cost a lot of money.

Activity 1

Choose twa different domestic animals you like most, Drow pictures showing
\ their work. Name the animal vou have drown.

| Activity 2

Use clay to make a model of one domestic animal vou know and bring if to the
| Class. The models should be kept at the agricultural corner in your classroom. J

Exercise

Which af the following is small Bvestock from the list below?

A. goat B. rabiloit C. pig 0. sheep
Which animal is kept for beef production?

A. cow B. goat C. pig 0. mule

Which anirmal is used for milk production?

A. dairy cow B. mare ZC. steer Ln. doe
- Mame the animal used for racing.

What are fhe two uses of cattle?

. Meat produced from pigs is colled



--- Page 99 ---
Summary

The rmain reason for keeping cattle i for beef production.

Pigs also produce valuable meat, colled pork.

Most people find it easy to keep brollers and layers as they provide a good source
of proteins,

Animals such as horses are used for ding. Horses are important because they can
bx used in the bush were there are no roads.

Glossary

Amusement providing entertainment

Commercial buying and selling of goods or products to maka
moray



--- Page 100 ---
=

Unit 19

Animal nutrition |

Key words

starch

protein commercial



--- Page 101 ---
Types of feeds

Animal feed is the food that is given to domestic animak, These can be grouped
as natural animal feed and commercial animal feed. Natural feed & food given to
domestic animals thet is found within the local environment. Commercial animal
food Is specially made food for animals, and Farmers have fo buy this for their
animals.

Natural feeds are made of plants which provide different nutrients. Some of the
nutrients that come from natural feeds include: starch and protein, Starch foods
are energy-giving foods like maize, sorghum, millet, ropoko and barley. Protein
foods are body-building foods that help the body to grow like ground nuts, soya
beans, sunflowers, Lucerne and colton seeds. Ground nuts, sovd beans and
Lucerne ore legume crops, Legume crops are plants with seeds that grow in long
cases called pods which are eaten os food, Maize, sorghum, millet, rapoko and
barey are cereal crops. Cereal crops are grass plants that produce grain thot can
ba eaten os food.

Commercial leeds are manufactured specially for animals and may be mixed
with natural feeds and processed with other food nutrients to help animals grow.
Commercial feeds hove animal proteins ond many other nutrients that are jalaletal
for animals. Takle 19.1 shows the nutrients pravided by natural and commercial
feeds.

Table 19.1 Moherol feeds Commarciol Towed:

| Animal pratelns Dither
Fish meal B Mineral fick

[oem | sat |

I

Storch foods i Fratein crops

millet

Ird=

When natural feeds are processed, thay become commercial feeds. These ore

bought,

Examples

= Broilers mash
= Layers mash

* Rabi pellets
= Dgiry mix

* Pig rash

= ‘Waaner meal



--- Page 102 ---
Feeding broilers
Types of Feeds

Broler starter mash
= (Crowes mosh

+ Broiler finisher mash

Feeding layers

Types of Feeds

» Chick starrer mosh
» Growers mash

= Layers mosh

= Laver pellets

* Layers crumbs

al fewds for pigs, rabbits and chickens



--- Page 103 ---
Activity 1

Visit the feed room at your school. Lock at bags of feeds in the feed room.
| what feeds are in the feed room? Record the type of feeds on the bogs.

| Activity 2

You should practise the actual feeding of ony type of small livestock kept at
| school, either rabbits or broilers.

Feeding broiler chicks

1. Count the chicks ond record the number,

%. Remove dirty water,

3. Remove dirty feed remains.

4, ‘Wash water froughs.

5. Fill water troughs with Clean water

4. Clean feed troughs

7. Fill feed troughs with chick starter mash

NB: Record what you did in your diary.
when feeding animals, it 5 important that they are given the corect amount
and type of feed. This wil depend on the age of the animals. For example.
broilers stort off with starter feeds for the first 2 weeks, From 3-4 weeks they are
given growers feed and tor the lost 2 weeks they are given finisher feed.

Giving animals the ght omount and type of feed will make them grow healthy.
Exercise

— is a source of proteins,

A. Maize BE. Wheat

on, Groundnuts 0. Millet
Which of the following is a cereal crop?

A sunflower B. lurcens
C. millet 0. soya beans

3 lucemealsa plant.
A. Starch B. Frotein C. Legurma D0. Cemral
which part of cotton is used as stock feed?
Nama a arop which provides starch In a livestock diet. |
Group the following crops under source of starch or source of proteins. Use
the list below.



--- Page 104 ---
_ Sova PEs
iil _groundruts

Summary
1
1 = Stock feed is made up of starch and proteins.
* There are notural and commercial stock feeds.
| + tis important to feed livestock with the comect feed.
] *  Well-fad livestock are healthy and mature quickly.

We should always follow Instructions when feeding our livestock,
Glossary
Commercial - produced for buying and selling

| Legumes —- crops which provide proteins ina diet
Protein — food nutdent that helps arowth of muscles
Starch — food nuirent that gives energy



--- Page 105 ---
Unit 20 Small livestock production

Types of small livestock

small vestock is used for the production of eggs and meat which can be sold
for money, Most of small livestock belongs to a group of animals called pouliry,
Poultry is the keeping of binds for meat and eggs. Examples of poultry include:
chicken, quills, turkeys, guineafows, pigeons, ond ducks, Other type: of small
livestock are rabbits and guinea pigs. Bees and fish are also kept for honey and
meat respectively,

Activity 1

select three small ivestock. pictures of the livestock, for example, broilers;
turkeys or rabbits.
Label the parts: heod, legs, wings, back, comb and wattes etc.

| List uses of livestock vou have drawn,



--- Page 106 ---
Activity 2
A visit to a chicken production project
Preparafions

| 1. Make arangements with the breeder
2. Give dote and time for the visit
3. Give the number of lecrmers to vist
4. Make preparations for the ip in fime

On the doy of the visit

1. Take your diary with you

2. Drow the chickens vou see

3. Draw the feed roughs and the water troughs
4. Record the feeds given to the chickens

| Activity 3

You should fead the rabbits kept of school. Record your activities in your |
practical diary. Go out to harvest natural feeds such os wondering jew and
block jack for feeding rabbits. Feed the rabbits,

Exercise

- Which small livestock gives us eggs?

A. fish B. rabhits =. chickens v bess
- Which animal does nat belong fo small livestock?

A. rabbits B. broilers C. layers 0. goats
. Which one Is classified as insects?

A. layers B. geass C. bees 0. ducks
Give 3 types of small livestock,
. Why do we keep small livestock?
. Drover any poultry and label the parts.



--- Page 107 ---
Summary

* small livestock kept ot home include chickens, ducks. rabbits and fish. These
are usually kept to be sold so that people can eam extra money.

| Glossary

a container for Ivestock to feed from
birds with wings and feathers that are kept by farmers fo
eggs and meat



--- Page 108 ---
j Unit 21 Apiculiure N

Key words
apiculiute: nectar Beedilve pollination



--- Page 109 ---
Apiculfure

Aplculture is the keeping of bees for the production of honey for commercial
purposes. Bees are important because they make honey. Bees are kept in hives.
Hives are a place where bees live and make honey, Sometimes bees find their
own hives in the cavities of trees, People who keep bees migke bee hives with
wood, When bees find o hive. they go inside and make honey.

Distinguishing bees from other insects

grasshopper

Flgure 21.2 Types of Insecls

Distinguishing bees from similar insects

Rees defend themselves by stinging animals that threaten or disturb them. They are
similar to wosps/mago/olonyovy because wasps also sting to defend themselves
and hunt, Bees are different from wasps because they are hairy and wide with flat
hind legs. Wosps' bodies are slender with a namow waist connecting the thorax
ond abdomen. Bees have a stinger that i designed to sting other bees ond whan
they sting other animals their stinger gets stuck on the flesh of the victim and they
clie while trying to fly away. Honey bees are only designed with enough vanom
to sting an enemy once. Yenom is pelson that = made inside an insects body.
Wasps can sting multiple fimes without dying because they use their venom to kill
tha insects they eat. Bees feed on nectar and polen from flowers only while wasps
feed on nectar and other insects. Table 21.1 shows the difference between Daes
ancl wWosps.



--- Page 110 ---
Table 21.9 Blinging and frioody inseols

Insects that sting

Insects that do not sfing

Have wide, hairy bodies with fal Slender with a nhamow
rear legs, connecting the thors

Honey bees can only sting once |
betore dying
feed on nectar and poilen from |
flowers ony

Uses of honey

Honey has many uses in the society, People use honey as food and medicine.
Honey is used to cure colds and flu and most cough syrups contain honey. People
make living iy keeping bees and selling honey,

How honey is made

Bees move fram flower ta lower searching for a sweet liquid called nectar. Nectar
is a sweet liquid that i ke sugar and water, As they move, their legs collect pollen
which is transferred from male flower parts to female flower parts for the growin
of new flowers. This process is called palination. The bass drink up the nectar and
their bodies absorb the sweetness of the nectar which is called sucrose and turn
it inte different sugars. These sugars ore called glucose and fructose. When the
bee has mixed the honey in its stomach, it brings it back to its mouth and aut into
honeyoombs in the hive, A honeycomb is a mass of wax calls built by bees fo store
honey. The honey coming from the baas” body is very watery 50 the bees fan the
honeycombs with their wings until the honey mix becomes thick.



--- Page 111 ---
Activity 1
Finding insects
Go out to lock for insects in the school grounds. Cateh insects and bring them

to the classroom. Be careful not ta catch stinging insects. Draw diagrams of
insects you have found.

Show head, thorax and abdomen. Six jointed legs and four wings. Show the
| sharp sting at the end of the abdomen. |

Activity 2

2 in groups, make a chart comparing bees and wasps. Draw and label both
insects and vse a table to compare them.

Figure 21.4 Bees sucking up nechar from a flower



--- Page 112 ---
Exercise

1. What do bees collect from Rowers?
A. Teector B. honey
C. sugar 0. Juice
_ is a ploce where bees ore kept,
A. Mest box B. Feed trough
C. Hive D. Hower pellets
which of the following Insects defends itself by stinging?
A. bee B. cockroach
C. grasshopper 0. butterfly
Which insects make honey?
Which insect can sting lke o bee?
match the terms and meanings in the table below.

a} Apicubture Transfer of pollen from male to female parts af a T—

Kaeping bees for honey preduction

ice Foun in foverers

Summary

Apiculiure is the keeping of bees in hives, for honey, Bees are kept in hives.
Sometimes bees find their own hives in cavities of frees. Commercial bes hives are
made of wood, and they ahbract bees to eccupy the hives. Bees are important
because they produce honey,

There are many uses of honey, host people use honey as food. However, honey
has medicinal values, and is used in cough remedy syrups. Some people eam a
living by looking after baes and selling honey.

Glossary .

Apiculture - ther keeping of bees in baa-hives for honey

gae-hive place where bees are kept

Nectar sweet Juice found in flower

Pollination ira nsfer of pollen grains from migle to female parts of a |



--- Page 113 ---
ER

—_— =

Multiple cholee: ———

Which farm amimal is kept for beef production?
A. cattle BE. goat C. pig 0. sheep
which animel is used for milk production?
A, donkey B. sheep C. dairy cow DOD. pig
The keeping of animals is called
A. poultry BE. apiculture
C. agriculture 0. breading
Which feed is given to brodler chicks?
A. layers mash B. chick starter mash
C. growers mash EC. finisher rmash
Select o feed given to rabbits.
A. bread crumbs B. chick mash
C.  growsars mash C. pellets
Ground nuts, soya beans ond Luceme are Crops.
A. Starch E. legume C. ceregl 0. protein
Select o place where bees lve.
A. nest box B. hive C. fead rough D. flower petals
The keeping of bees in bee- hives for honey 5 called
A. breeding BE. polination
CC. farming D.  dpiculture
_ is a liquid used by bees fo make honey,
A. SUCTosEe B. fruchkose
=. glucose 0D. nectar

. What is g bes hive made of?

A. wood B. poles
C. polythens D. cardboard

Structured questions

Which animal is kept for pork production?
Give ? uses of cattle. i2]
Cotton seed may be used as feed.
Mare two crops which add proteins if a poultry dist,
Sunflower sead is used to produce .
Hens kept for egg produchion are calied
Bees are kept for production of

tead is given to mature broilers,

is a commercial feed is given to rabbits.

sting multiple mes without dying.



--- Page 114 ---
- ee a al

Figues 22.7 Ferm implements and machinery

Objective |

Lecrners should be able to:
1. idertify farm implements

Introduction

Successful farming depends on the farm Implements and machifery that o farmer

1 owns. The farmer neads fam machinery ond equipment to carry out work acsily
ond do many jobs on the farm. Farm equiprient and machinery must abwvoys be
kept safe,

Farm implements and machinery work well when they are well maintained, Thay
do not breck down when they are in use,



--- Page 115 ---
Unit22 Farm implements and machinery

Figure 22.2 Farm implements

SEAT pe opie: Ww ekify aol ric fen T or oh = = = : &

Key words
fertilizing soil preparation migation”

Types of farm implements and machinery

Far implements are fools, machines and equipment used by farmers on the farm.
They help farmers to take care of crops and animals, These can be classified
under the following groups: Sof preparation and cultivation. planting, fertilizing



--- Page 116 ---
and pest control, livestock, imigation and harvesting. Most fam equipment Fall
under these groups,

Soil preparation and cultivation equipment is used fo prepare the sail for planting
and taking care of crops after they hove been planted. This involves removing
wasds that distur the growth of crops, Tractors, ox-ploughs, hoes and homrowing
rakes are examples of implements that fall under soil preparation and cultivation
equipment.

Fianting equinment is used to help formers put seeds in the ground so that they
grow. In more technologically developed farms, farmers use planters to plant
Crops. A planter is an agricultural fam implement towed behind a fractor, used
for sowing seeds on a field, IF i connected 10 the tractor with o grow-bar and
drags seeds over prepared land,

Fertilizing and pest control equipment is used fo sproy and apply fertilizer and pest
control chemicals to crops. In Zimbdbwe the most common tool that falls under
this category is the knapsack sproyer.,

Livestock equipment is mainly wsed fo make sure that animals grow healthy and
shrong. [tis used to protect domestic animak from diseses and increcise the strength
of their bodies” ability to fight diseazes. Examples of these include vaccines which
are medicines used to prevent animals of diferent sizes and ages from certain
diseases, dipping solution for removing of licks and feeding conlainers,

Imgation equipment is used to water crops on fields. Examples of irigation tals
include sprinkler pipes. Harvesting equipment is used collecting the produce of
crops that are ready to be processed or eaten. Common examples of these
include milking machines, mowers, rakes and potato harvesters, Table 22.1 shows
the different types of farm equipment.

Table 22.1 Farm machinery

Machinery Mommie



--- Page 117 ---
Caring for farm equipment

For equipment to last for along firme we have to look after it. That means we have
ter keep records of how we use our equipment ond take care of it. On large farms,
fan managers keep an inventory record that shows how workers use the farm
implements. For example if @ worker drives a tractor, the record shows when they,
take it for use, when it was serviced and if it hos been refueled.

Shapes of implements and machinery

Activity 1

Let us see how good you are at drawing. Draw any implement or machinery
, hat you have leamt about.



--- Page 118 ---
| Activity 2- Field trip
Arrange the date and fime with the farmer,

l.
2. Suggest what you want to see for example; combine harvester recping
wheat,

J. Amange suitable tra msc,
| 4. Learners camry their prachical diaries,
, 3. Leamers record the observations they make.

Which Farm machinery does not hove wheels?

A, fam lomy B. tractor
C. grinding rill Cv lawn mower
| 2. Aknopsock sprayer is a tel
! i A. soil preparation and cultivation E. planting
! C. fertilization and gest contral D. iMgation tool
| Where would you keep names of leamers whe have taken out teols for
| work in the garden?
| A. tool boord E. fool register
| C. check list 0. fat file
| 4. Which tool is used for digging?
— is a farm machinery with huge tyres,
Draw a wheelbarrow,
Summary
* Farm equipment and machinery help farmers to werk using bess labour,
* There are different farm equipment and machinery for ditferent fam processes
such 0s lond preparation, planting, weeding and harvesting.
i * Farm equipment and machinery must be kept in a safe ploce when not being

used.

| Glossary

combine harvester farm machinery that harvests crops such as



--- Page 119 ---
3. Sprinkler pipes are used to .
A, water vegetable gordens B. water flower gardens
C. water crops on fields 0. to provide water
4. felect the equipment which is used for spraying chemicals in the garden.
A. watering con BE. pressure pump
C. knapsack sprayer Cn. low mower
5. Which implement is shown in the picture?
A. lawn mower B. knapsack sprayer
C. ox-piough D. wheslbarrow
4. Which machinery does not recuire fuel 1o do work?
A. knopsack sprayer B. ginding mill
C. tractor on omy
7. What machinery helps formers to produce milk?
| A. sead planter EB. combine harvester
C. roilking machine 0. sprinkler
8. Choose a fam implement used to sow seeds on a field.
A. tractor B. sprinkler pipe
CC. planter 0. hos
?. Select a machinery which does many jobs on the form,
A. ox-plough B., froctor
C. knopsack sprayer DO. lown mower

End of topic assessment test

aT 3 = HE

Multiple choice questions
A hoe Bused to _

A. imgate crops B. cultivate land
C. plant crops 0. harvest crops

. Farmers use. lo monitor the way workers use tools.

A. anotebook B. o diary
C. an inventory record book DO. an exercise book.

D



--- Page 120 ---
| 10. Which set of equipment has tools that do not work together?
A. [own mower, rake BE. wheslbarrow ; shovel
C. x-cart; york D. watering can ; hommer

Structured questions

A sprayer is used for sproying chemicals in the garden.
What machinery would you use for harvesting wheat?
Home two tools you con use for digging in the garden,
What is the use of 3 lawn mower?
Home the tool used to load manure onto an ox-cort.
makes the engine of a tractor to run,
Alter using a knapsack sprayer, one should . before its storage,
A is a tool that is pushed by a person.

1.
2
4,
5.
&.
7.
8.


--- Page 121 ---
d

Figure 23.1 Maize field under inigation

Objective |

Leamers should be able fo list iacal agricultural products,

Introduction

Agriculture isa business which getits money from the growing of crops ond keeping)
rearing of animals for sale. in Zimbabwe, most people live in ural oreas. In the rural
areqs there are many products which are produced. In low rainfall creas, crop
production is affected Dy litte winkall. The Government has introduced irgation
in mony parts of the country. This means that Doth craps and livestock can be
produced.



--- Page 122 ---
Agribusiness

Unit 23

Flashback
Kitch PEAY

Key words

wholesale markup income abat i]

Agribusiness [5 the growing of crops and keeping of livesiock for selling to get
money.

Local agricultural products
Read the following passage which talks about local aghcultural products.

My nama is Lindiwe Moube. | ive in a plot near Zhambe. Our school is located in
a low rainfall area. It is not possible to grow crops vsing rainfall, Most people now
hove an imigation system. We practise imigation all year round. in Zhombe, we
grow mdize, groundnuts ond sove beans.


--- Page 123 ---
Crops grown under imgation are maize, cotton, groundnuts, vegetables, sugar
becns and sunflowers. Maize 1s sold to the Grain Marketing Board. Cotton is sold
to COTTCO.

Sometimes these crops are consumed locally. Maize, for example, is harvested
and stared for use by the family. Green mealies cre scld to buyers who come fram
the urban areas. They buy at wholesale prices. When thay sell the mealies they
add a few more cents. They then sell of o mark-up price, mark up price is the price
ot goods sold at the market.

At my homestead, we harvest all the maize and prepare it for the market. We get
enough money to pay for schoal fees and clther family expensss, We then keep
enough money to buy maize mead from the shops.

Some people in our area have large gardens. In these large gardens they

arow vegetables which they sell as fresh produce. Fresh produce are agricultural
products that are sold while they are sill fresh. Cobbages, tomatoes, letivce
and carols grown in our ared are token to the cities and sold, The growing of
vegetables for sale in large gardens is called market gardening.

In our area we keep catfle, There are many people who keep cattle. This type of
farming is called ranching. Cattle are kent In kraals at night They are led out fo the
pastures during the day. Sometimes the headmen have fo walk long distances to
find enaugh pastures for their cattle.

= i

Figure 23 3 Growing vegetables for sale

When the cattle mature they are sent to the market, There are several abatiolrs
where cattle are sold and slaughtered for meat. The people from our community
earn an income from their livestock,

Other animals kept are goats, sheep and pigs. Goats and sheep ore kept on tha
same postures as cattle, Sometimes goats are a problem in our gardens, so we
have to fence our gardens properly.



--- Page 124 ---
Other local products

some fame keep pig: and others keep broilers and layers. Pigs are easy fo keep
Eacause they are fed on grain from the fields, Poultry i very popular, Do vou have
Brcilars of your school? Broilers grow fast ond they mature within o few weeks.

Keeping layers is also o good project. Farmers In our area keep layers for egg
production. Lovers produce more eggs thon other poultry. Layers take 20weaeks to
start producing eggs. This means that you hove to spend money on buying feeds
for a long time about five months is needed before layers start producing eggs.

Summer crops are maize, sorghum, sugar care, cotton and tobacco.
Winter crops are wheat and sugar beans,

Main agriculture production centres

Banket and Karo
Chiredz, Middle Sabl
Hippo Yalley, Miewasine

Fhfanga, Marondera and Mozowe
Beatice. Centenary, Gobwe Sanyati Kadarma

Collecting agricultural products
There are several crops grown in the school and community. Moke a list of the
crops grown, Which ones are aise grown at your school?

| Activity 1

Bring some samples of crops grown at your home. You can pick from the field.
Examples of crops and grains to collect are groundnuts, soya beans, ropoko,
sorghum, sunflower and maize.

Drow pictures of the samples you have collected and label your drowings.

Exercise

1. ‘Why is imigation important in Zimbabwe?
A. cattle are reared B. crops con be grown in dry areas
2. green medglies are produced  D. many doms are available



--- Page 125 ---
Select a cios of poultry,

A. broiler BEB. goat
CC. pig D. sheep
which of the following Is a winter crop?

A. maze B. wheat

C. sorghum Dr. sunflower
Which crop is grown far food?

List 4 local agriculiural products we have In Zimbabwe,

Summary

+  Severgl crops are grown under natural rainfall conditions.

= There are areas which receive low rainfall in Zimbalws, In such oreo: crops
cannot be grown successfully using rainfall,

= Theres are irigation schemes which provide water for crop production,

« Crops which are grewn under imigation are many. For example, moize,
sorghum, cotton, soya beans, groundnuts and vegetables, can be grown
under Imgaficn.

+ Crops grown commercially are wheat, sugar cane, cotton, tobacco and
maize. Formers eam money from selling crops and livestock.

Glossary
Abattoir a place where animals are slaughtered (killed) for meat

Income ~ money got from selling products
Mark-up — the amount added by a seller on the price of goods

| Wholesale - selling goods in large quantifies



--- Page 126 ---
Multiple choice questions

. Which crop is grown for food?

A, maize B. tobacco
iC. cotton O. sugar cone
. elect a crop which is grown under raintal conditions in your area.
A. maize B. sorghum
Z. millet DC. potaio

. Which crop produces cooking oil?

A, maize BE. millet

C. sorghum D. sunflower
which crop can be sold gs fresh produce?

A, 50Ya Beans . sarghurm
C. millet DO. maize

. Which crop produces baking flour?

A. whaaot .sowd beans
C. sunflower 3, sorghum

h, What does mark-up price mean?

A. high price . wholesale price
C. priceincreass . market price

. What does ranching mean?

A. keeping cattle i. herding callle
C. feeding pigs . hunting game
. Crops are sold in order ta

A, spend money . sOvEe Money
C. som income 0. recover cost

Structured questions

What 5 agribusiness?
List 5 local agricultural products found in Zimbabwe?



--- Page 127 ---
a] Mame the crops.
b] Why are these crops important?



--- Page 128 ---
Unit 24 End of year assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Section A
Answer all questions
1. What is Agriculture?
A. the keeping of lorge numbers of animals
B. the growing of vegetables on lorge scale
C. the keeping of animals and growing of crops
0D. the keeping of small livestock and growing vegetaiias only
2. Three of the following ore importance of agriculture except that it

A. provides clothes B. provides food

C. provides cars D. provides shelter
3. Choose a hol used in the garden.

A. plough B. disc harrow

C. garden fork Cr. planter

4. ‘Which tool Bb used to dig in grovel soil?
A. spade B. garden fork iy oe
C. rake D. hoe y ZH

5. Which foal is shown in the diagram below?

D. hoe

A, Spode B. hand fork =. rake

& Three of the following tools can be used to water vegetables except
A. hose pipe EB. bucket
CC. whesalbarmow 0. watering can

7. Which of the following is not o season?

i A, December B. spring

CC. wintar DO. autumn

8. InAUtumn people ore busy
A, shelling BE. harvesting
ZC. ploughing 0D. weeding

2. ‘When trees start to hove new shoots this is the start of SECSON,
A. winber B. autumn
i. spring Or. summer

10. Summer covers the following months except

| A. November B. December

CZ. June Cx,  Jonuony



--- Page 129 ---
20.

21.

A. rope, coullfiower, spindle pod |
B. rope, tomatoes cabbage
C. tomatoes, nvevhe/olude, covo
D. okra, rape, sunga |
which of the following is not a field crop?

What is water weed for in agriculture?

A, bathing BE. imigafian |
C. swimming 0. yachting

A tree 5 an indigenous frulf free.

A, matohwe/uxakuxaky B. mango

CZ. peach 0. avocado

Which of the following is not a source of plant nutrients?

A. Cattle manure B. Compost

C. Goat manure 0. Fodder |

The following animals give us manure except

A. cattle E. goat

C. chicksn D. dogs

The following are indigenous vegetables except

A, Black jock B. cobboge

C. spider lower 0. poor man's spinach

which of the following has a list of exotic vegetables only? |

A, sunflower B. sovo beans

C. rape 0. maize |
The crops which give us meals meal ars

A, maize, sunficwer, rapoko B. rapoko, sorghum, maize

C. millet, soya beans, maize D. maize, sorghum, cotton

Crops which give people cooking oil ore
A sunflower, sorghum, round nuts

B. sunflower, ground nuts, soya beans
. maize, sorghum, sunfiower

0. moire, sana beans, millet

Growing of decorative plants is called

A. QOQIONOoITyY B. omamental haficulture
C. horiculture 0. beauty gardening

Why are fruits important in aur diet?

A. they gives us nitrogen and potash

B. they gives us mineral salts and vitamins
C. they gives us proteins and fats

0. they gives us plant nutrients

Growing and caring of frees is refered to as
A, farming BE. horticulture
ZC. foresity Db. agronomy



--- Page 130 ---
23. Which of the following is not an importance of trees?

A. fire wood 8 manure
| C. oxygen 0. carbon dioxide
24. A plant which grows up to two meters and can be used to decorate is called
& .
A. herb EB. shrub
C. free 0D. vegetable
25. Which of the following crop is used lo make clothes when processed?
A, sunfiower B. soya beans
C. cotton 0. tobacco

26, What is compost used for?

A, provides plant nutrients B. shoding vegetables
| C. controls waads LD. conserving water
127. What is bedding material used for?

A. covering the floor B. warming pigsties

©. feeding broilers 0. absorbing water

28. Slream bonk erosion is coused by
A. growing crops B. heavy rains
o. culing trees D. strong winds
29. ‘Which type of soil has fire soll particles?
A. sand EB. loam
C. clay Cn. silt
30. Why is 0 compost heop made of layers?
A. effective use of materials B. keepswet
C. tarot guickly D. easy to makes
31. What is the suitable height for a compost heap?
A, Tm B. 1.5m
32. Which livestock produces egos?
A. Cows B. goat
C. chicken 0. pig
33. is the rainy season in fimbabwe.
A, Winter C. Spring
B. Surnmer 0. autumn
34. Which animal is used for milk production?
A. dairy cow B. mare
| C. steer D. sheep
35. Which of the following is not small livestock?
A turkey B. fish
=. rabbit 0. goat
3&,.  3elect a rabbit feed from the list below.
A, growers mash B. chick mash
C. crumbs 0. pallats


--- Page 131 ---
41.

42,

is an enclosed pasture where cattle graze.
A. kroal B. Poddock

C. Spray roce 0. Cattle pen
is the feed given to broiler chicks.

A. Layers micash B. Chick mash

=, Growers mash Ch. Pellets

. Which vegetable should not be given to rabbits?

A. tomato leaves B. block jock
C. lucems 0. cabboge leaves
aelact a place where bees are kept,
A. next box B. hive
i. feed trough flower petals
Which set of aguipmeaent & out of placa?
A. wheelbarrow, pick B. knapsack sprayer watering can
C. lawn mower; rake D. ox cart; york
select the equipment which is used for spraying chemicals in the garden.
A. watering can B. pressure pump
C. knapsack sprayer BC. lawn mower
Which equipment does nol require fuel to do work?
A. trocar B. grinding mill
2. knapsack sprayer 0. omy
Which equipment is out of placa?
A. ox-plough B. wheelbarrow
C. cultivator 0, ox=-cart
is awinter crop grown in Zimbabwe,
A. Maize B. Sorghum
CZ. Wheat BC. Sunflower
is grown for production of baking flour,
A Wheat B. Sova bedns
2. Sunflower 0. Sorghum
What does mark-up maaan?
A. high price B. wholesale price
=. price increase LC. market price
which of the following is not a by-product of agriculture?
A. Bread BE. Sugar
CC. Ledther 0. Cotton
select a crop which is d staple food and can alse be sold as a cash crop.
A. Sugar B. Catton
&. Tobacco 0. Maoize
Which activity adds value to a product?
A, feeding molze to poully B. adding proteins to stock feeds
Z. keeping meat in the freszer 0. selling fresh milk



--- Page 132 ---
Section B
Answer all questions
1.

aj

bl
c)

a)

=}
J

a)

ba)

al

bs)

a)
o)

cl

Structured questions

Write any two importance of agriculture.

fil} [2]
What is protective clothing? [1]
List any twa basic farm tools and their uses, 12]
List the four seasons in a year,

fil

ih —

(iii }

[iv] 14]
Which agricultural activity is done in summer? fy |
What signs show us that the rainy season is near

State three uses of water in ogricuiture.

{il :

(i)

io) -— [3]
Whot is water conservation? [1]
In which season is ploughing ond pla niing done? [1 1
Match the following items to show thot vou understand the SOUNCES

of plant nutrients,

[fi Cattle | al Pig manure

(i) Leowes, gross bl Pouliry manure
|i] Poultry ©) Cattle manure
Hiv] Pig d] Compost manure [4]
Which tool is used far carrying manure in a garden? [1]
Mame two common indigenous vegetables

fil — fi)  — [2]
Name fwo common exolic vegetables

|) — [2]
Which vegetable gives flavor to food? [1]

_ —



--- Page 133 ---
a) match the terms and the meanings lished in he fable below.

pdeonings of terms

Terms

| Apiculture

* Transter of pollen from ride to fernaie pars of he fower, |

Cavity Keeping bees for honey e.g. production
Hollow in a free trunk used os a Rive

Juice sound In Hower
Bb} Why is apiculture important? IM

7. «al ‘Write down any 2 domestic animals you know, [2]

b) What are the two types of animal feed.
1] —
fii} — [2]
8. a) Whaotare fleld Crops [1]
Bb] Lst down any 3 field crops. 13]
g) Gum frees are usually grown in a. i [1]
2, a) The thres main local soils are sand, cloy ond. [1]
Bp] Why is a compost important? [1]
dl A compost heap should be tuned and watered so that it [1
10. a} What is agribusiness? [1]
Bb) Write down two plants that are used in crmamertal horficuliure. 121

c] Tree are important in that they dive us
fi) —— R
fi) ——— [2]



--- Page 134 ---
_Ventures Primary
Agriculture
Grade

Ventures Primary Agriculture Grade 3 Learner's Book has been developed to support the
content, aims and objectives contained in the New Primary Education Curriculum for
fimbabwea, It contains all the activities that the leamens need fo cover the Agriculfure
Sylicbus for Grade 3.

The boalk:

= Covers the requirements of the new syllabus,

*  Frovides exercises and learner-centred aclivities which encble leamers to undarstong
the subject at a theoretical and practical level.

» Offers many individual, group and closs activities that stimulate decision making,

orablem solving and cooperation,

Features comprehensive word checks which define the vocobulary in The fexl,

Caters for both rural and urban envircnments.

|Grecr a variety of assessment fests at the end of each topic and term.

Offers multiple choice and structured questions which assist learnars in preparing for
Paper 1 and Paper 2 examinalions.

The learner's book is part of the Junior Pimary learner's Development Series completed with
a comprehensive teacher's guide.

college press



