--- Page 1 ---
SB college press _

Ventures Primary

English

New Curriculum

Learner's Book


--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primary
English

Learner’s Book 3

PA college press



--- Page 3 ---
Ventures Primary English Learner’s Book Grade 3

© C.J. K. Ngwaru, 2017
© Illustrations and design College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd, 2017

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyright Act, (Chapter 26:05), 2004.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable for criminal prosecution and
civil claims for damages.

First published 2017

Published by
College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd
P.O. Box 3041, Harare, Zimbabwe

Typeset in 12 point Times
Artworks by W, Mukutirwa, P. Chiroodza, T. Gondo and X. Ngundu

Printed and bound by Shumani Mills Communications, Parow, Cape Town
SW64129

ISBN: 978 1 77900 685 1

Acknowledgements
The author and publishers would like to thank the following for permission to use copyright material:
* Gateway Primary School for the cover image.
* The National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe for the photograph on page 37.

The publishers have made every effort to trace the copyright holders. If they
have inadvertently overlooked any, they will be pleased to make the
necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.

It is illegal to photocopy any page of this book without written permission from the publishers.

—————


--- Page 4 ---
t
| Term 1
Unit 1
Unit 2
) Unit 3
Unit 4
Unit 5
} Unit 6
Unit 7
1 Unit 8
Unit 9
§ Unit 10
Unit 11
: Unit 12
Unit 13
) Term 2
Unit 14
Unit 15
Unit 16
Unit 17
| Unit 18
Unit 19
Unit 20
Unit 21
Unit 22
|
]
|

Getting tO KNOW ONE ANOTNET ....c..eeeeeeteeeeecceeeeeeeseeeses eee ses ena 1
MAKING THENAS eerie eee cessre cesar secs sabe sesssansesenns 5
Revision and ASSESSMENT 1......... eee rer erste eee sse see ssens 9
Funny people do funny thiNGS ......eeeeeeeeieieeeecceeeececcre ee cccccseie cee 10
Jimmy plays Q dirty TICK! ...coeiieeeteeeeece retreive cere 15
Revision and ASSESSMENT 2... ce eee cece eeeee eee se ese
Morning assembly at school
Our NationQl FIA ....ccviveieeieinninieciencinnereeenneeeses cess pt,
Revision and assessment 3........ccccoevvevverennn,

Giving AIreCtions .......ccceeeecveeeecveercreennnnss °S

Themba goes to school .................A. Re

Revision and assessment 4..............Xeeerneee.
Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 1)
Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 2)

Revision and assessment 5.....................\...

Pen-friends (PArt 1) ....cceeeeieieeeereeenenns error te rete te tetsu se esses es bet enona
[YR {([=] ale 3 (de Tg 57 FURST
End of term 1 revision and AssesSMENT .......coooiiiiviviveeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeens 59
Pet animals are OUI fHIENAS .......uvviiiiieeiiiiceeeeeeeere sere ee ee eee seen 65
More about pet ANIMALS .....c..eeveeeeeeceeereeeeccreeee ee eee ree eeaes 71
The boy Called TAUIANT ..... eee eee eee ee snes ae eae 76
REVISION CNA ASSESSMENT 7. .eeieeieereereeieeereee eee see ses ssssnsssssassssssesaeeees 81
Thulani goes 10 the City auc 82
Thulani iN The SUBDUMD eects 88
REVISION ANA ASSESSMENT 8... ieee ccc eevee cesses ssenee ee sse ees 93
Thulani meets Sifiso and ThA Ani .....eeeeieeiiiiiiieeeeee eee 94
Time to work and ime 10 PIAY..c...eeei ieee creer cesarean 101
REVISION ANA ASSESSMENT D..orrereireveirirrreeeeerrerere ere essreeeeeessssesreesssssns 107
A FAMIY OUTING «eerie teen reeeee ese ree nnre esses srssee esses sansa ses asssnes 108
(€7eTe Te I 1111 a To LR RPSRRRRRRTRIN 114
Revision and ASSESSMENT TO. eeeeicciceecceeeereerertereieeeeereesseeaasaassseaannannes 119


--- Page 5 ---
Unit 23
Unit 24

Unit 25
Unit 26

Term 3

Unit 27
Unit 28

Unit 29
Unit 30

Unit 31
Unit 32

Unit 33
Unit 34

Unit 35
Unit 36

Unit 37
Unit 38
Unit 39

Taking part in sports At SCNOOI.......cic ieee eee 120
DOING NOMEWOTK .....cvviiiieirireireiererircr crest sees sere eeene sees ss sae senses essnne se 125
Revision and AssessSMENT TT... eerie cer se enee ee eeesesseaseees 130
HomMEeWOTK is FUN TO ME! eevee eee secaenseae sree esaneeae es 131
End of term 2 revision and ASSESSMENT ........evveivveriiriireeeeeeieiereeeereeene 135
A visit To Mrs Mabika's Plot (PAM 1) ce. eee reeevevennene 144
A visit To Mrs Mabika's Plot (PQ 2) ....eeeeeeeeeieeeeieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeene 147
Revision and assessment 13... cece cree 152
RY 1 (T= fel a1 [oo UOT SETUP URTURT 153
A Meeting UNAEr the fr@€ uveitis ese nene 157
Revision and assessSmMENt 14... ... erica 161
This environment is QUIN NOME civic eee eres seers 162
Nduna gets disappointed.........ccciiriiierrneceecece eevee serene enna 166
Revision and assessment 15......... oii eeeeee es 170
A birthday present (PArt 1) coerce eee see eeee se 171
A birthdQy present (PAM 2)... eects cece eee ees esaene 176
Revision and ASSESSMENT 16... eee ses sanr eer esesesssesee ee 182
TRE CAIENAAN cece ceric ccreeerree reese eee se reese ara es sssae ses ssnse ese sss bee ssnnss 183
LL TSX=1 [5] ] [| | AOU UTI 188
Revision aNd ASSESSMENT 17... eects esses sees se ese snne 193
(BT To] 1-3 UU 194
ZUVA VILAGE cutee cae estes ae esas cree sne ene sabes see sns ant osnusnneene 200
End of term 3 revision and assessment .......cooooieeeiveeeeeeceeeeeee eens 205



--- Page 6 ---
. Getting to know one another

Listen |

Your teacher will tell you his or her name and where he or she lives.
Say the following:
“The teacher's name is Mr/Mrs/Miss/ : J

A short play to act
In pairs, read the dialogue below. Take turns to tell one another your real names

and addresses.

What's your
name and where
do you live?

My name is Ben Siziba
and | live at Number 42
Mopane Street in Ruwa.



--- Page 7 ---
Read

Going to school

laugh uniforms village leave goodbye knows Miss

Nomsa goes to school with Sam. Sam and Nomsa are brother and sister. They
live with their parents in Tamuka Village. Sam is nine years old and Nomsa is
eight. Nomsa is in Grade Three. Her teacher is Miss Gomo. There are many

other learners in Grade Three. Miss Gomo knows all the learners in her class by
name.

ri

Sam and Nomsa walk to school every morning. The school is near their
home. Before they leave home, their mother gives them food. Then they say,
“Goodbye mother! Goodbye father!” There are many other learners who walk

to school too. The learners go to school in clean uniforms. They talk and laugh
as they walk to school.

Answer these questions.

Who is Nomsa's brother?

Who does Nomsa stay with?

How old is Nomsa?

How old is Sam?

How do Nomsa and Sam go to school?

rN


--- Page 8 ---
Take turns to answer the following questions in full correct sentences.
1. Do you have brothers/sisters?

2. How many children are in your family?

3. How many brothers/sisters do you have?

4. What is the name of one of your brothers/sisters?
5. Is he/she older or younger than you?

6. How old is he/she?

7. When is his/her birthday?

8. Does he/she go to the same school with you?

9. In what grade is he/she?

10. Do you like your brother/sister? Why?

Write four good sentences about your brother/sister. In the sentences, use the real
name of your brother/sister. You may make use of the questions in Speak above.

A paragraph

A paragraph is a short piece of writing that begins with a new line. It has a few
sentences talking about one thing or one subject. In the passage Going to school
we read about Nomsa.

Write a short paragraph about Nomsa. Write the paragraph by answering the
questions below in full. Remember the answers must all talk about one subject,
who is Nomsa.

Nomsa i

Is Nomsa a boy or a girl? How old is she? Where does Nomsa live, with who? Whose
sister is Nomsa? In which grade is Nomsa this year? Who is Nomsa's teacher?
Does Nomsa like going to school?

Using and
The word and is a joining word. And can be used to join two sentences.
Examples 1. What's your name and where do you live?



--- Page 9 ---
2. My name is Pamela Moyo and | live at Number 42 Hillside
~ Road in Ruwa.

3. John opened the door and ran outside.

Use ‘and’ to join the following pairs of sentences. Leave out the underlined words.
She stood up. She looked through the window.

He tried to jump over the fence. He fell down.

Liz sat down. Liz began to read a newspaper.

James fell from a tree. James broke his arm.

The leamers stood up. The learners greeted their teacher.

3 Write: Extra mile

app

Join the two sentences using the word and.

The baby wants milk. The baby wants porridge.

We saw a fish. We saw a frog.

A carpenter uses a hammer. A carpenter uses nails.
| can dance. | can sing.

The log is long. The log is thick.

rN -


--- Page 10 ---
Making friends

Read

Nomsa meets Pamela

same asked where answered began
age laughing

On the way to school, Nomsa began to talk to one of the girls. She asked her,
“What's your name and where do you live?’ The girl answered, “My name
is Pamela Moyo and | live at Number 42 Hillside Road in Ruwa.” Then the girl
asked Nomsa, “What's your name and where do you live?” Nomsa answered,
“My name is Nomsa Dube and | live at House Number 35, Tamuka Village."

From that day, Pamela Siziba and Nomsa Dube became friends. The two girls
were of the same age and in the same class.



--- Page 11 ---
= Write 3

Answer these questions.

Where does Nomsa live?

Where does Pamela live?

Do you think Nomsa and Pamela liked one another?
Nomsa was older than Pamela. True or false? .

Why is it a good thing to have friends?

abn

The short a sound asin and, cat, man, happy, ran bag
@ Say # this verse aloud after your teacher and learn to recite it.

‘The haan man, the cat and the rat

An old happy man with a big flat hat
Ran info the house to fetch a pan and
a fin of jam.
“In bis hand he had a big black hand bag.
Then he saw a big black cat.
The big black cat sat on a flat mat,
Egting a big fat rat

Here are some writing rules:

* every sentence begins with a capital letter, and ends with a full stop:
They were going to school.

* aperson's name always begins with a capital letter:
David goes to school with Danisa and Maria.

» the pronoun 1 is always written as a capital letter:
John and I are good friends.

Write these sentences correctly, with capital letters and full stops:
1. sam and nomsa were brother and sister

Oo a



--- Page 12 ---
2. pamela moyo and nomsa mabasa were friends
3. when lsaw anna i remembered her
A. everyday | walk 10 schoo) with elizabeth

Write a composition about yourself. Your composition should be in one paragraph.
The title of your composition should be Myself.

Introducing friends: A short play
Divide yourselves into groups of four. Present this play:
Actors: two friends, and parents of one of the friends

The play:
The two friends come home. The friend at home infroduces his/her friend to the
parents.

Step 1

Start by greeting your parents. Then speaking to the parents, say:
Mother and Father, this is my friend (full name).
lives with his/her at/in
(In one sentence tell your parents something good about your friend)

Step 2
Speaking to your friend, say:
(first name only) meet my mother/father.

(first name only)

Step 3:
The friend speaks to the parents:
Starts by greeting the parent(s)
Then says: | am glad/pleased to know you mother and father. How are you?

Step 4:
The parents answer the friend of their child.
They say:
| am/We are pleased to know you too.
Then they can ask the friend other things like:
Do you go to the same school with (their child)? Are you in the same class
with (their child? So, how old are you now?

Which group was the best in presenting the play?



--- Page 13 ---
|

Speak: Extra mile

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
Do you have many friends or just one friend?

What is your best friend's name?

Is your best friend a boy or a girl?

Where does your best friend live?

Is your best friend older or younger than you?
How old is your best friend?

To which school does your best friend go?

In what grade is your best friend?

(a) Isit good to have a friend?

(b) Why?

VON AWN ~

We also use and for showing that one thing happens after another.
Look at these two sentences:
Jane came in. Jane sat next to me.
Using and we can write the two as one sentence like this:
Jane came in and sat next to me.
Note that we do not repeat the name.

Using and, write these pairs of sentences as one sentence.
1. Mother switched off the lights. Mother went to bed.

2. He saw a big snake. He shouted for help.

3. The farmers ploughed their fields. The farmers planted their crops.
4. The bus came. The bus stopped for a while.

5. The teacher walked in. The teacher greeted us.

6. Father picked a hoe. Father began to dig in the garden.
7. My dog saw another dog. My dog began to bark.

8. Jacob was late for school. Jacob was punished.

9. The fast car skidded on the road. The fast car overturned.
10. | made a fire. | boiled some water for tea.


--- Page 14 ---
Revision and assessment 1

Listen

Your teacher will tell you two things about himself/herself using and in every
sentence:
My name is Mrs Moyo and | live in Mapako Village, Gutu District. | am now thirty
years old and | have two children.

1.

Using and. tell the class two things about yourself.
2. Complete the following sentences:

(a) We are three children in our family and

(b) I'was late for school this morning and

(c) Jane's sister is a nurse and

(d) It started raining in the morning and
3. Make your own sentences using and.

Read this paragraph correctly, pausing where there is a comma and stopping

where there is a full stop.
Jonas lives in Gobo Village in Bubi District. He lives with his parents, three
brothers and one sister. The three brothers are Melusi, Bonani and Don. His
only sister is Maria. Jonas goes to school. He is in Grade Three and his teacher
is Miss Dube. Jonas has two friends: Moses and Jabulani. Both live in the same
village with Jonas. Like Jonas, the two friends are also in Grade Three at the
same school.

yo
A

== Write

Write a short paragraph of 4 - 6 sentences under the topic My best friend.
Use: the comma, the full stop, and capital letters correctly.
Make use of the word and fo join some of your sentences.



--- Page 15 ---
Funny people do funny things

Someone or something that is funny makes people laugh. Your teacher will read
to you this funny story of a farmer whose cattle were stolen.

A funny story

A farmer had two of his cattle stolen from his farm. This is the written note the
farmer sent to the police station:

My two kettle have been stolen from the farm. Please help.

On going out to look for the thief, the police met a woman carrying two new
kettles that she had just bought. The police took her to the farm to ask the farmer
if these two kettles were not his. That was when the farmer realised that he had

made a spelling mistake in his report to the police. He had written kettle instead
of cattle.

Tell the class:

1. What is funny in this story?

2. Why did the police look for kettles instead of cattle?

3. This is a funny story. It teaches us that when we write words we must

Read

Jimmy, the funny man

jokes tricks rushed knew especially
gather around knows moved brick

In Duma Village, there is a funny man called Jimmy. The young boys and girls
in the village call him Jimalo. Jimmy lives all by himself in a small brick hut. The
hut is at the far end of the village. Everybody in the village knows Jimmy. They
all know him because he is a funny man.

be”



--- Page 16 ---
Everyday many people, especially children, gather around Jimmy. They gather
around Jimmy to see or hear him. Jimmy does different things just to make
people laugh. Sometimes Jimmy barks like a dog. Sometimes he grunts like a
pig. Sometimes he crows like a cock. Sometimes he roars like a lion. Sometimes
he runs like a very old man.

Complete these sentences.

Jimmy is also called
Jmmylivesina — |
Jimmy's hut is at the far end of the
What is Jimmy's hut built of?
Jimmy isa man.

Choose the correct answer.

1.
2.

Jmmyisa_______ man.

A. thief B. greedy C. rich D. funny
Jimmy lives all by himself. This means that he lives

A. in the village. B. alone.

C. with other boys and girls. D. in around brick hut.



--- Page 17 ---
3. Where is Jimmy's hut?
A. At the centre of the village. B. Af the far end of the village.

C. Intown. D. Ona fam.
4. Alionroarsandadog ———
A. barks. B. grunts. C. shouts. D. crows.

5. This story shows that —
A. many people in the village did not like Jimmy.
B. only the children of the village liked Jimmy.
C. Jimmy was liked by many people in the village.
D. Jimmy died when he was still young.

Ya
Speak and write A

Doing words (verbs)
Take turns to:

-bark like a dog -cry like a baby
-crow like a cock -meow like a cat
-bray like a donkey -bleat like a goat
-roar like a lion -grunt like a pig

-bleat like a sheep

Tell the class what you do, for example, | bark like a dog.

The words in bold are called verbs.

Verbs are doing words or action words. They tell us the action or what is being
done.

Match the animals to their sounds.

1. Adog bleats.
2. Apig brays.

3. A cock barks.
4. A goat meows.
5. A donkey roars.
6. Alion—_ bleats.

7. Acat CrOWS.

8. Asheep grunts.

Writing a paragraph
Under the heading A funny story write a paragraph about a funny story that you
know.

Begin like this:
One day



--- Page 18 ---
Listen and speak

The silent k

Say this sentence after your teacher:

Everyone in the vilage knew Jimmy, the funny man.
In the word knew the k is silent.

Rule: wherever there is kn in a word, the k is silent.

(i) Say this short poem after your teacher. Remember in kn the k is silent.
Did you know?
Did you know that
When mother knits the jersey
She does not use knives,
And is not making knots
With the long knitting needles?
And did you know that
You don’t have to kneel
When you knock on the door
Of someone well-known to you?

(ii) Say these words correctly after your teacher:

knew knives know knitting
knee known knit kneeling
knot knowing knock knocking
knife knobkerrie kneel knowledge

Speak, read

Spelling: the short a and e sounds
Say this sentence correctly:
The man sat with the other men.
The word man has a short a sound.
The word men has a short e sound.
The sound in the words man and men is not the same.
Read this short paragraph saying all the words correctly.

The fat man and the sad men

At sunset | sat by the side of a track. Then a fat man came along the track. The fat
man had a bag full of apples. Two sad men came from behind the fat man. The
sad men began to beg the fat man for the apples.



--- Page 19 ---
Spelling

Your teacher will call out some words with the short a and e sounds for you to write.

More verbs, the action words
Say this sentence from the story Jimmy the funny man:
He makes funny jokes all the fime.
makes comes from the verb make
makes is a verb that tells us what Jimmy does all the time.
A child wrote down what her mother does everyday or all the time. The child
wrote like this:

What mother does everyday.

Everyday, mother wakes up early and makes breakfast for us.

She says goodbye when we go to school and remains alone at home.
She cleans the house.

She cooks for us as she looks after the baby.

She greets us when we come back from school.

She prays before we go to bed and locks all the doors.

She gives us all her love as she takes care of the whole family.

Note that she added ‘s’ to the verbs.

Rewrite the following sentences correctly.

1. A baker (make) bread and cakes.

2. A vendor (sell) things, but not in a shop.
3. A farmer (grow) crops.

4. A shepherd (look) after sheep.

5. A shoemaker makes or (repair) shoes.

6. A builder (build) or repairs houses.

7. A barber (cut) people's hair.

8. A plumber (fit) and repairs water pipes.
92. Maria (talk) too much, even as she (eat).
10. Our dog (bark) whenever it (see) a stranger.



--- Page 20 ---
Jimmy plays a dirty trick

Read

Jimmy plays a dirty trick

trick dirty thief middle arrows bow
spears knobkerries fight laughed quietly blankets
disappointed heard nobody thought

One dark night Jimmy played a trick on the whole village. In the middle of
the night he cried aloud, "Thief! Thief! Help! Help!” All the people in the village
heard Jimmy's cries. They came out with guns, knobkerries, spears, bows and
arrows. They all wanted to help Jimmy to fight the thief.

When Jimalo saw all the people he laughed aloud. He shut himself in his hut
and laughed even more. Then the people knew. Jimmy had played a dirty
trick on them. The villagers were very disappointed. Quietly, they walked back
to their houses.

Then, on another dark night a thief came to Jimmy's hut. The thief took away
Jimmy's blankets and clothes. Jimmy saw the thief and cried out aloud, “Thief!
Thiefl Help! Help!” Jimalo's cries for help were loud and clear.

The people in the village heard Jimmy's cries. But nobody came out of their
houses to help Jimmy. They all thought it was another trick. So the thief got
away with Jimmy's blankets and clothes. This time Jimmy cried a lot.


--- Page 21 ---
Choose the correct answer.

1.

The first time Jimmy cried out, “Thief! Thiefl Help! Help!”

A. there was no thief B. nobody heard him

C. there was a thief D. his blankets were stolen
. The second time Jimmy cried out, “Thiefl Thiefl Help! Help!”

A. the people did not hear him B. it was another trick

C. he laughed aloud D. there was a thief

. What disappointed the people in the story?

A. Jimmy himself was the thief. B. The thief had run away.
C. The dirty trick played on them. D. Their stolen blankets.

. This story teaches us

A. that orphans are bad people B. how to live in the village
C. not to play dirty tricks on people D. about life in the village

. Why did Jimmy cry a lot at the end?

A. He never cried; it was just another trick. B. Nobody heard him cry.
C. Jimmy himself was a thief.
D. He had lost his blankets and clothes to a thief.

Read

The comma

When we are reading, we pause a little where there is a comma like this
one ,.

The sentence in the box below is from the story Jimmy the orphan. Listen to
your teacher refding the sentence with pauses where there is a comma.

The villagers came out with guns, knobkerries, spears, bows and arrows.

The teacher also raises his or her voice a little when he or she pauses at the
comma to show that the sentence is still going on.

Read the following sentences correctly. Pause where there is a comma.

My friends are Mpho, Melusi, Kudzai, Tshidino and Naison.

We come to school on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and
Friday.

The wet months are December, January, February, March and April.

My father bought me a new shirt, a pair of shoes, a track suit and a jacket.
School uniforms come in many colours: blue, green, white, khaki, pink
and maroon.

Gro ho


--- Page 22 ---
EE —————— ac, ee So

Writing sentences with commas
Rewrite the following sentences correctly. Put in the comma in the right places.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Now read aloud the sentences you have written, pausing a little at the comma.

It was raining on Saturday Sunday Monday and Tuesday.

We have cold weather in May June July and August.

At school | play football tennis cricket and volley ball.

Yesterday Nomsa Kuda Jabulani Tendai Liz and Fadzai were late for school.
The people who came first second third fourth and fifth in the race got prizes.

Writing a short story .
Write a short story about a funny person you know using the following paragraph
sketch:

A funny person | know

I know a funny person called ________ He/She livesin/at —______. (Name of
person) — likes. He/She also likes to

More verbs telling us what someone does everyday:

In Unit 3 we learned about verbs telling us what mother does everyday.

For example, mother drinks some tea and eats a piece of bread as she reads a
newspaper.

Note that -s has been added to the underlined verbs.

The paragraph below is about what Tom does everyday. Say the sentences one
by one with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.

What Tom does everyday

Tom (live) in town where he (work). Everyday Tom (get) up early in the morning.
He (clean) the house; and (make) breakfast for himself. Then he (ride) his bicycle
to work. Sometimes Tom (travel) to work by bus. When he (arrive) at his workplace,
Tom (greet) other workers that he (meetf). Tom (spend) the whole day at work.
During work hours Tom (talk) to other workers. At mid-day Tom (rest) for a while.

At mid-day Tom (eaf) a piece of bread and (drink) some tea. After work, Tom
(return) to his house. He (prepare) supper for himself. After supper he (read) some



--- Page 23 ---
|
|

newspapers. Sometimes Tom (sit) in front of his television and (listen) fo the news.
Tom (like) sports news very much. He (say) he enjoyed taking part in sports during
his school days. Tom (enjoy) living and working in fown.

Using the beginning given, complete each sentence with the correct form of the
verb of your own:

Everyday our teacher
Every week the bus
Every night my dog
Every month my father
Every morning our school head

Every Sunday my friend 090mm
Every year the farmer
Every time thatmon —

Listen

© NOG AWN =

More about the comma

When we read, we pause a little where there is a comma; and stop where there
is a full stop.

Take turns to read aloud this short paragraph correctly.

The four friends

Joyce, Susan, Anna and Maria are good friends. They walk to school fogether
on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. During the holidays, the
three girls visited the vegetable market. There were women, boys, girls and men
at the market. The people there were selling oranges, bananas, apples, mangoes
and vegetables.

Answer these questions pausing a little where there should be a comma and
stopping where there should be a full stop. Use and between the last two names.
Who are the children in your group?

Who are some of the teachers in your school?

Which are some of the towns and cities of Zimbabwe?

Which are the first five months of the year?

Which are the last four months of the year?

On which days of the week do we come to school?

Who are your best four friends?

Which are some of the animals people keep in their homes?

Which are some of the wild animals found in Zimbabwe?

WENO =



--- Page 24 ---
Revision and assessment 2

Listen

Listen carefully as the teacher tells you three things that he/she does:
On Sunday | go to church. After the church service | play golf with my friends. Then
in the afternoon, | go to watch a game of football.

Everyday | get up early in the morning and wash myself. | drink a cup of tea and
eat some porridge. Then | hurry to work where | stay for the rest of the day.

On Saturdays, | travel to town to meet . Together we sit in a fast food
shop and we buy chicken for lunch. Then we talk about our school days and our
work. | enjoy these Saturday meetings.

In turns, tell the class what the teacher does.

Read these sentences correctly:
1. I beg you to lift this bag for me.

2. They sleep on a bad bed.

3. We sat on a set of new chairs.

4. He had a big head.

5. His dad is dead.

6. The caftle milk is in the kettle.

7. She was sitting on a mat when we first met.

8. She likes to pat her pet.

9. Mother bought a pan for herself and a pen for me.
10.1 bet that is a bat.

Dictation
Your teacher will call out five sentences from Read above. Listen carefully and
write the right words in those sentences.



--- Page 25 ---
UNIT

Morning assembly at school
If 2

| ———
ston

Your teacher will tell you about the school morning assembly.

L Read

Morning assembly

flag-pole assembly important prayer sometimes hymn
flooded bridge dangerous rows national flag season
hoist national anthem

Every Monday our school starts with morning assembly. We all stand quietly in
neat rows. The teachers all come to the morning assembly. The school head is
always there for the morning assembly.

First, we greet the teachers. Then we stand quietly as the national flag is hoisted
vp the tall lag-pole. After that, we sing the national anthem. The national
anthem is the song for our country, Zimbabwe. We then say a prayer and sing
a hymn together. Finally, the school head tells us important things.



--- Page 26 ---
The school head tells usimportant news at assembly. Last week he told us about
the rivers in our district. He said we must use bridges when crossing rivers. The
school head said these rivers are sometimes flooded. The rivers are flooded in
the rainy season. The school head said flooded rivers are dangerous. So, we
must not cross flooded rivers.

Choose the correct answer.
1.

This school has morning assembly

A. everyday B. only when the school head wants
C. on Mondays D. twice a week

What is the song of the country called?

A. a prayer B. the national flag

C. ahymn D. the national anthem

The passage says: ‘...the flag is hoisted up the flag-pole.’ The word
hoisted means .

A. lifted B. pulled down

C. respected D. looked at quietly

It is dangerous to .

A. cross flooded rivers B. go to morning assembly at school
C. sing a hymn D. walk on the bridge

The oo in the word flooded have the same sound as the 00 in the word.
A. floor B. blood C. poor D. spoon

What would you say?

A. Morning assembly at school is a waste of time.

B. Morning assembly at school is very important.

C. Teachers should not go to morning assembly.

D. The national anthem should not be sung at morning assembly.

A short play to act in groups: Morning assembly.
In groups, act the morning assembly at your school. Pretend that:

*

one learner is the head teacher
four learners are the teachers
the rest are the learners.



--- Page 27 ---
AN

Do dll the things that are done at morning assembly, like:

* the school head tells the learners about the national anthem or the
national flag
* the learners and the teachers say a prayer and sing a hymn together
» thelearners and the teachers all sing the national anthem in the local language
* the school head makes some important announcements.

Listen

The short e sound
(i) Say this sentence correctly:
We must not cross flooded rivers.

In the word not the o has a short sound.
(ii) Now say this sentence also from the passage Morning assembly:

The teachers all come to the morning assembly.
In the word come the o has ashort a sound.
Recite this poem in turns. The poem has words with the different sounds of o

Mother and son

When it gets hot and dry,

Mother and son pray to God above

And sing a song for the rains to come.
~ But when it rains on and on for long,

Mother and son pray to God above;

And sing a song for the rains to stop.

Write two paragraphs about morning assembly at this school. In the heading, give
the school a name of your own choice.

Morning assembly at School

Every school starts with morning assembly. First the learners . The
learners all stand quietly in . After that they all . The is the
song for the country, Zimbabwe. Then they and also . Finally the

school head

Last week the school head told the learners about . He said flooded rivers

are . So the learners must not



--- Page 28 ---
Speak

Every time there is morning assembly, listen carefully to what is said. Afterwards, tell
the class what was said.

Say it like this:

During morning assembly today/yesterday Mr/Mrs/Miss

Then afterwards:
(a) Sing the National Anthem in your groups.
(b) Repeat the National Pledge one by one.

said

(a) Write the National Pledge.
(b) Write the National Anthem in the local language.

You can also use the internet to find the words of the National Anthem in English,
then write it in full.

Matching words in pairs.
You read these words in the passage Morning assembly.

Match the words in suitable pairs, starting with the word on the left side.

flooded assembly
National pole
morning season

neat rivers
rainy head
flag anthem
school rows



--- Page 29 ---
Our national flag

UNIT | pe———b.---.1

Read

Al The Zimbabwe national flag

respect stripes horizontal majority history
agriculture blood country represents especially
minerals peace independence

Each country has a national flag. A
national flag is a piece of cloth or other
material that represents a country. The
Zimbabwe national flag represents our
country, Zimbabwe.

The Zimbabwe national flag has seven
horizontal stripes of green, yellow, red
and black. It also has a white triangle with
a five-point red star and the Zimbabwe
Bird.

The colours and symbols on the national
flag represent the culture and history of
Zimbabwe. Green represents agriculture.
Yellow stands for the mineral wealth of
Zimbabwe. Red is for the blood of

the people who died fighting for the
independence of the country.

Black represents the black people who
are the majority in Zimbabwe.

The white triangle stands for peace and progress in Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwe
Bird is the national symbol of Zimbabwe. The five-point red star represents the
wishes of the people of Zimbabwe.

It is very important to respect the national flag.



--- Page 30 ---
Writing a describing paragraph
Under the heading: The Zimbabwe national flag, first draw the Zimbabwe flag.
Below it, describe the national lag by answering these questions in full sentences:

What does the national flag represent?

Answer: The national flag represents

Is the national flag important or not?

Answer: The national flagis —

How many horizontal stripes are there on the Zimbabwe national lag?

What colours are the stripes?

Write in one sentence saying what each one of the colours represents.

What else is on the Zimbabwe national lag?

What is represented by (a) the white triangle (b) the Zimbabwe Bird (c) the red
star?

Read and speak

The silent a asin head
Say this sentence from the passage Morning Assembly:
The school head tells us important news.

In the word head the letter a is silent. The letter ais also silent in the word road.
(i) Read aloud and enjoy this short story.

The healthy peasant

There was a peasant who had only two goats. He was poor but healthy. One day
the peasant was on his way to the shops to buy a loaf of bread and some oats.
The weather was cold and he needed to make some tea to drink with the bread.
On the road he met a woman wearing a heavy leather coat, leather shoes and
a leather hat with feathers on it. Only rich people have the money to buy such
heavy leather clothes. The woman was walking slowly and speaking softly. The
peasant could see that the rich woman was sick. The poor peasant said to himself,
‘Health is better than wealth.’

(i) Discuss:
What do you think this saying means: Health is better than wealth?



--- Page 31 ---
Adverbs

Words that describe actions

Answer this question:

How could the peasant see that the rich woman was sick?
Answer like this:

The peasant could see that the rich woman was sick as she was walking
and talking

Say this sentence from the story The healthy peasant:

The rich woman was walking slowly and speaking softly.
-the word slowly tells us how the woman was walking
-the word softly fells us how the woman was speaking.

Complete the sentences below. Choose your words from this box:
heavily neatly happily quietly brightly

After winning the match, the learners were singing
Our teacher wants us to write all the time.
Last night it was raining

The girls opened their books and began reading
The moon was shining

ord =

Adding -es to some verbs
Zodwa wrote a paragraph about what her father does everyday. She wrote it all
in one long verse. Read the verse aloud.


--- Page 32 ---
What my father does everyday
Everyday my father:
Washes himseff,
Brushes his teeth,
Dresses up in a suit,
Goes fo the school on foot,
Crosses three roads on his way,
Teaches all day at that school,
Catches the bus to take him back home,
Fixes my bicycle when | ask him to, :
And fetches some firewood for mother to make a fire,
: He does al this everyday,
Rule: for everyday actions by one person, add -es to all verbs ending
with: -sh -ch -x and to the verbs do and go.
For example: She washes herself and brushes her teeth everyday.
washes comes from wash and brushes comes from brush.

Rewrite these sentences correctly by adding -es to the verb in brackets:
Everyday my brother (wash) himself in warm water.

On her way to school, Mary (cross) two big roads.

My sister (teach) at a secondary school.

Everyday mother (catch) the morning bus to work.

The man (go) to the market every week.

The girl (fetch) some water from the borehole every day.

When the car breaks down, the mechanic (fix) it.

Sometimes my mother (dress) like a nurse.

After writing, read aloud to the class the sentences you have written.

Listen and write 4

The long and short i sounds
Listen as your teacher reads these two sentences from the passage Morning
assembly.
1. We stand in neat rows and greet the teachers.
Both neat and greet have along | sound
2. Itis very important to respect the national flag.
Both it and is have ashort i sound.

ONO WN

Some words may have a sound that is nearly the same but they mean different
things. Always be careful to write the right word in your sentences. Say these
sentences correctly:

1. People who are not drivers must not sit in the driver's seat.

2. The ship carrying the sheep sailed across the big dam.

3. | beat the dog that bit my young brother.

4. If you give me a banana, | will eat it.



--- Page 33 ---
(i) Look at, and say the words below in their pairs after your teacher.
In each pair one word has a short i sound, and the other has a long ‘i sound.

it/eat fill/feel is/ease ship/sheep
bit/beat dip/deep sit/seat fit/feet
hill/heal sick/seek bins/beans did/deed
hit/heat slip/sleep lid/lead whip/weep
pick/peak fin/teen hip/heap sin/seen

(ii) Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

Cattle and goats (if, eat) grass.

There are a lot of trees on the (hill, heal).

It was difficult fo open the (lid, lead) of the tin.

The farmer has a flock of (ship, sheep) on his farm.

| (fill, feel) cold in the morning.

When full of water, the pool is very (dip, deep).

There are seven days in a (weak, week).

We throw the dirt from the yard onto the rubbish (hip, heap).

ONAN ~

Capital letters, commas, and full stops
Look at this sentence from the passage Morning assembly.

The flag has seven horizontal stripes of green, yellow, red and black.

Note that:

« the sentence begins with a capital letter

* the sentence ends with a full stop ’

» there are commas between the names in a list: green, yellow, red and black

+ between the lost two names in the list we put the word and instead of the
comma.

Rewrite the following sentences. Put in capital letters, commas and full stops.

1. at school the learners play football netball tennis rugby and cricket

2. we grow tomatoes cabbages onions beans and carrots in our garden

3. she went to the supermarket to buy sugar salt bread jam and milk

4. some of the colours of the rainbow are red orange yellow green and blue
5. farmers keep cattle sheep goats pigs horses and donkeys on their farms

Writing a letter

Write a letter to a friend telling him / her what you have learned about Zimbabwe's
National Flag. Remember to put your own address at the top of your letter.

Begin your letter with this sentence:

Today, | would like to fell you about the National Flag of Zimbabwe.



--- Page 34 ---
Revision and assessment 3

Listen

Listen and watch carefully as your teacher shows you and reads to you a passage
about Zimbabwe's National Flag.

Read this paragraph correctly:

A mad man with his funny hat sat on a flat mat. He had a big bag and a black cat
in his hands. Then, the black cat saw a fat rat on the flat mat where the mad man
was sitting. The black cat ran to catch the fat rat and the mad man ran after his
black cat. The fat rat ran into the mad man’s big bag. The cat ran after the fat
rat into the mad man’s big bag. The mad man also ran after his black cat into his
own big bag. Then, the mad man, the black cat and the fat rat were in one big
bag on the flat mat. Oh, what a funny little story!

Imagine that you have a sister who is a teacher. Re-write the following passage
saying what your sister does every time by using the correct form of the verbs in
brackets. Spell the words you change correctly.

My sister, the teacher.

| have a sister called . She (teach) at a school in the next village. Every
morning she (wash) herself. After breakfast she (brush) her teeth. Then she (rush)
to the bus stop. She always (catch) the only morning bus that (go) to the school
where she (feach). If she (miss) that bus, she (go) to the school on fog{ and
(pass) through the village houses. On the way she (cross) a railway ling she
(reach) the school. She (do) this every week. When it rains, my siste i) she ad
a car of her own. a



--- Page 35 ---
Giving directions

Listen

Carrying out commands/instructions
Stand outside. Listen carefully and do what the teacher tells you to do.

Using past
Tell the class any two places that you go past on your way from home to school.

Say it like this:

On my way from home io school, | go past the and the

Read

In groups of three read this passage, acting it as a short play:

Narrator: Tabeth was going to
the shops to buy a
loaf of bread. She left
the house and turned
left at the gate. Then
she walked down the
road leading to the
shops. She walked
past the vegetable
market before turning
right. At this corner she
met an old woman.
The old woman was



--- Page 36 ---
standing in the middle of the way. Tabeth stopped to greet the
old woman.

Tabeth: Good morning madam. You seem to be lost. Can | help you?

Old woman: Good morning my dear girl | am indeed lost and | need help.
Please tell me where the clinic is. My leg is painful and | must have
it bandaged.

Tabeth : Oh! I'm so sorry, madam. The clinic is right behind that tall building
over there. Just walk along this pathway until you get to the corner.
Then turn to your left and walk along the path until you reach a
borehole. At the borehole turn to your right into a wide road. Go
along the wide road until you see the big clinic sign-post on your
right. Just next to that big sign-post is the clinic itself.

Old woman: Thank you very much. You are such a good girl. Goodbye!

Tabeth: Don't mention, madam. It was a pleasure helping you find your
way to the clinic. Bye-bye.

(Afterwards say which group of actors was the best.)

4 Write

Answer these questions.

Where was Tabeth going when she met the old lady?
Where did Tabeth meet the old lady?

Where was the old lady going?

Why was the old lady going to the clinic?

Why was the old woman standing in the middle of the road?

oho =

Give full answers to these questions from your teacher.
Who is sitting on your right/left?
Who is sitting behind you/in front of you?
Who is sitting beside you/next to you?
Who is sitting between and ?
Who is sitting in front/at the back of the class?
Who is sitting near you/the door/window/teacher’s table?
Who is sitting far away from you?
Who is sitting between yourself and ?



--- Page 37 ---
Listen and read

The short and the long oo

Say this sentence after your teacher.

Note: make the 00 in looks and good short and long in room and broom.
My room looks good when | sweep it with a new broom.

A poem to read and recite.
Take furns to read aloud then to recite this poem. The oo have a short sound: the
other oo have a long sound.

After school

After school in the afternoon,
My room looks good
When t sweep it with a broom.

After d good day af schogl,

| sit on the wooden stool

Under the roof or under the moon,
And read d book of polish my boots:
Or help: mother fo ‘Cook some food.

short or long sound of oo
In each line select two words that have the same short or the same long oo sound

1. A. food B. moon C. wood
2. A. book B. roof C. took
3. A. shoot B. look C. hook
4. A. cook B. tooth C. took
5. A. school B. stood C. pool
6. A. roots B. crook C. wool

Learn to recite this poem below about directions:
As you recite, turn and face or point to the directions that you are saying.



--- Page 38 ---
Everyday
The sun rises in the east,
And sets in the west.

When | go to school,

| face the north;

And on my retumn home,
1 face the south.

Answer these questions about directions:

Where does the sun rise every morning?

Where does the sun set every evening?

Which direction do you face when coming to school?

Which direction do you face when returning home from school?
Which direction is the door of your classroom facing?

Which places are to: (a) the east (b) the south (c) the west
(d) the north of your school?

aE of

Write a short paragraph giving directions from the school to one of these places:
- the clinic or hospital

- the shops

- to the fruit and vegetable market

- the police station

- the chief's home

- the borehole (or) water well

- the next school

- the council offices

In your heading say: From the school to the

Start by saying:
You walk out of the school yard facing the



--- Page 39 ---
Themba goes to school

UNIT |

Read

Themba goes to school

pathway stream wide through towards
botiom forest hurry supplies corner

Every morning | carry my books in a satchel and hurry to school. | goaonga §
pathway between two ant-hills and walk towards a stream. | go across the
stream and pass through the forest with many trees. | walk up one side of a
hill and run down the other side of it. At the bottom of the hill | walk past a
vegetable garden and a small dam. This small dam supplies the village and the
clinic with water, and it never dries up. Then | go round the corner of the fence

to join the main road. Finally | walk along the wide road past a clinic. Then | am

at school.

Answer these questions.

Where does Themba hurry to every morning?

What does Themba go across on his way to school?
What does Themba walk past on his way to school?
What does Themba walk through on his way to school?
Where does Themba run on his way to school?

abhwN~



--- Page 40 ---
Using where words (prepositions).
Complete this paragraph by filling in the right where words:

Themba goes to school

Every morning Themba hurries school. He goes a pathway, two
ant-hills, —___astream.Hewalks —_____thestreamand pass —___ aforest
with many trees. He goes one side of the hilland runs the other side of

it. At the of the hill he walks the vegetable garden and a small dam.
Then he goes the comer of the fence to join the Finally Themba
walks the wide road the clinic. Then he is school.

Using verbs to report what someone does from time to time
In the story Themba goes to school, it is said:

Every morning | camry my books in the satchel and hurry to school.
The words carry and hurry tell us what Temba does.
If someone else reports what Themba does, this is how he/she will say it:

Every morning Themba carries his books in a satchel and hurries to school.
Note that the word carry becomes carries and the word hurry becomes hurries.
Rule: drop the y and add -ies

Rewrite the following sentences with the correct form of the verbs in bold and in
brackets. Remember the rule to drop the y and then add -ies to the verb.
1. The baby (cry) every time mother goes away.

2. This dam (supply) the village with water.

3. An aeroplane (fly) over our school every week.

4. This boy is good; he always (fry) to do the right things.

5. Whenever | write her a lefter she (reply) quickly.

6. My new satchel (carry) more books than the old one.

7. The farmer (worry) if there is no rain.

8. Awoman (marry) the man she loves.

Read aloud to the class the sentences you have written.

Look at this sentence from the story Themba goes to school:
| go up one side of the hill and run down the other side.
The words up and down tell us the position.



--- Page 41 ---
» Although | thought | got nearer the

up and down are known as prepositions.
Select the right preposition in the box to fill in the spaces in the sentences below.
Use each preposition only once.

between by from along through before QCross on

Themba walks the forest on his way to school.
Themba goes to school foot.
Themba walks along a path that passes
On his way to school Temba goes
Some learners go to school ______ car.

All the learners are tired when they return home
They greet their parents they sit down to eat.
My father was going to the shops and | went

two small hills.
a stream.

school.

© Nov AWN =

with him.

Rd, Read and speak

In the story Themba goes to school, it is said:
| go across the stream and pass through the forest with many frees.
In the word through, the gh is silent.

() Read and enjoy this short poem. The -gh is silent in the words.
"A night thought

Last night | hurt my right thigh

As | climbed a tall straight free

While my neighbour's daughter watched.
| thought | could reach the bright moon
That lights through the night

But Ll was not right in my thoughts

As the height of the tall straight free

Did not get me to the bright moon

_ bright night moon
- Than my neighbour's daughter
- watching from below.



--- Page 42 ---
More prepositions
Select the right prepositions to fill in the blanks.

1. The aeroplane flies the mountains.

A. up B. between C. over D. into
2. When mother is away | look the baby.

A. after B. with C. to D. across
3. Inclass | sit Jonas and Mary.

A. at B. between C. in D. from
4. The roofs of the trees grow ground.

A. on B. over C. under- D. at
5. I have come to play you today.

A. by B. at C. on D. with
6. Look the moon. It's very bright tonight.

A. from B. in C. at D. to
7. Father is travelling to town bus.

A. by B. with C. in D. on
8. When grow | want to be a farmer.

A. to B. of C. in D. up

Writing paragraphs
Choose any one of the places listed below. Write two paragraphs in é — 10 lines
on how you go there from your home.

the church the clinic the store the school
the market the bus station the police station the borehole

How | go to the

Use some of these words: along, towards, across, between, past, through, up,
down, round :



--- Page 43 ---
| Revision and assessment 4

f | Listen

Take turns to carry out the following orders from your teacher:
Lift your right / left hand.

Touch the learner sitting to your left / right.

Touch the learner sitting to your left with your right hand.
Touch the learner sitting to your right with your left hand.
Touch your left ear with your right hand.

Touch your right ear with your left hand.

Go and sit between and

Come to the front past the door.

Go to the back of the class through the middle.

Tell the class where you sit in class using the words:
left, right, between, past, near, beside, in the front, at the back, near, next to

2d, Read

Read this short poem and point to the directions as you say them:

Home, school, home!
As the sun rises in the east every moming,
1 will be going north fo my school.
As the sun sets in the west later in the day,
1 will be going south;
On my refum home from school.
North, south, east, west
Home is always best!

Write four different sentences saying where some known places are from your
school using these words:
to the south, to the north, to the east, to the west



--- Page 44 ---
Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 1)

Listen and speak

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about his/her birthday.
Narrate your own birthday stories.

Read

Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 1)

independent hero southern liberation war brave colony
acre buried heroes capital statue representing colonial

Our country, Zimbabwe, has a birthday too. It is on the eighteenth of April
every year. Thisis Zimbabwe's national day; the day when Zimbabwe became
independent in the year 1980.

Zimbabwe was a colony of a country called Britain. A colony is a country that
is ruled by another country. At that time Zimbabwe was known as Southern
Rhodesia. The colonial capital city was called Salisbury, now Harare. The
black people wanted to rule their own country. So they fought a long war to
free the country. The war was called the liberation war.

Many people were killed in that liberation war. The brave men and women
who fought in that liberation war are our heroes and heroines. A hero is a
man who has done something very brave in helping others. A heroine is a
woman who has done something very brave in helping others.

Today, some of the dead heroes and heroines are buried at the National
Heroes’ Acre in Harare. Some of them are: Josiah Tongogara, Jason Moyo,
Herbert Chitepo, Ruth Chinamano, and Sally Mugabe. There is a big statue
representing all the heroes and heroines at the National Heroes' Acre in Harare.



--- Page 45 ---
———— -
cam

Answer these questions.

. What is the name of our country?

. When did Zimbabwe become independent?

Do you think it is good for a country to be a colony? Why?

. What was the name of the war to free the country from Britain?

What was the colonial name of Zimbabwe?

What was the colonial name of the city of Harare?

What should you do in order to become a hero or a heroine?

Where is the National Heroes’ Acre in Zimbabwe?

Name any three National heroes and heroines you have heard about.

VON AWN —

LN Read and speak

Heroes of Zimbabwe.

Find out the names of ten of the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe and use them
when you read and Teche he poem below.

To the hares dnd Keraines of Zimbabwe

We salute

The heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe.

You: {say the names of at least three heroes. here}
Gave your own lives,

In order to free us all.

Thank you, brave son 20a daughters of the soil.

We shall never forg

Qur heroes and feroan



--- Page 46 ---
A noun can be one thing or many things for example one book, many books
We have added -s at the end of the noun book to make it books.
Read these sentences aloud:

Mr Moyo has a kiosk. A kiosk is a
very small shop. In his kiosk, Mr
Moyo sells books, pencils, pens,
rulers, newspapers, sweets, drinks,
buns, biscuits and bread.

Write the word for many for these nouns. Add -s and say them correctly:

day eye week month boy plate
tree radio mountain girl donkey bird
stone dog table friend chair cat

More about nouns

Some nouns do not add -s or change for large amounts.

Look at this paragraph:

There was some water in the kettle. It was not much. | used a little sugar in my tea.
There was a lot of salt in the fried eggs. There was too much cooking oil too. | did
not need a lot of food. | ate only the bread. Then | went on doing my work outside.

The underlined words are examples of nouns that do not change even for large
amounts.

Using the nouns in the box, make sentences of your own.

Remember that the nouns below do not change, even for large amounts.

a lot of a little some less much more



--- Page 47 ---
water wind qir work bread salt

sugar medadlie-meal tea oil blood rain
hair sand food pepper soup juice

paraffin petrol diesel sweat fire time

Writing a letter

Write a short letter to a friend telling him/her about the birthday of Zimbabwe.
In your letter, write about the following:

- when Zimbabwe's birthday is

- when Zimbabwe became an independent country

- the colony called Southern Rhodesia

- the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe.

Look at these two sentences:

A man called Herbert Chitepo is a hero.

A woman called Johanna MaFuyana Nkomo is a heroine.
A hero is male; and a heroine is female.

Hero is the opposite gender of heroine.

In numbers 1 - 8 below replace the underlined name with its correct opposite
gender from the box:

queen he waitress lady hens princess lioness actress cows heroines
girls women Sir

The farmer keeps many bulls on his farm.

The lion does most of the hunting.

The king was the ruler of the whole country.

When the queen dies, the prince becomes the new queen.
On the aeroplane, the passengers are served by a waiter.
Madam Baleka was a good leader.

This is a school for boys only.

There is no job that is for men only.

Our teacher is a fine gentleman.

We feed our cocks on chicken feeds.

Many heroes died fighting for Zimbabwe's independence.
He was the best actor in the play.

ORONO hh Wh =

NO



--- Page 48 ---
=
From Speak above, re-write sentences 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, and 13 with the correct
opposite gender from the box.



--- Page 49 ---
Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 2)
UNIT

Read

Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 2)

throughout choirs hoisted march speech parachutes
celebrations soldiers display parade horse-back motor-bikes
independence wonderful air-force

Zimbabwe's independence is celebrated on the eighteenth of April every
year. The day is a national holiday. Throughout the country people hold big
parties, play or watch games and listen to choirs singing. There are lots of drinks
and food for the people at the parties, just like at our own birthdays.

The national anthem is sung and the national flag is hoisted. The president's
speech is read during these celebrations. In his speech the president always
tells the story of Zimbabwe.

The main celebrations are held in the capital city, Harare. The soldiers of the
country parade and then march past the president. There is a fly past by jets |
from the Airforce of Zimbabwe. The fly past of the jets is usually followed by |
soldiers jumping from the aeroplanes in the sky to the ground using parachutes.
Then there are wonderful displays by the police on motor-bikes and horse-back.
The people of Zimbabwe always go to these celebrations in big numbers.



--- Page 50 ---
V/

Choose the correct answers.
1. This passage shows us that, to the people of Zimbabwe, the eighteenth of April
is _—
A. not a holiday B. a boring day
C. avery important day D. a day they don't like
2. The people of Zimbabwe always go to these celebrations in big numbers.
This means that:
A. Zimbabwe is a country with very many people
B. There are big people in Zimbabwe
C. Not many people enjoy the independence celebrations
D. Many people enjoy the independence celebrations

Speak and write |

Nouns: adding -es (or) -ies for many

Read this paragraph aloud:

Long ago. missionaries came to Africa from countries over-seas. They built
churches and schools with many classes. They also built hospitals. Many babies
have been born at the hospitals built by the missionaries.

The missionaries also taught people to grow crops like potatoes and tomatoes.
They also taught the people to make dresses. The people also learned to grow
fruit trees which give them good fruits like mangoes, peaches and berries.

Match the words in bold in the passage above with the words in the box below.
Starting with the word in the box below, say it like this:
One missionary many missionaries.

dress mango baby church tomato country
missionary berry peach class potato

A Write: Extra mile

Adding -es and -ies to make the nouns many
Rewrite this passage changing the nouns in brackets to many.

Gender equality

In many (country) today there is gender equality or sex equality. Jobs that used fo
be for men only are now open fo women also. That explains why nowadays we see
(lady) driving (bus) and heavy (lorry). In the (city), there are women in (industry)



--- Page 51 ---
like metal-work or wood-work. Some (lady) even own their own (company) and
(factory) that produce huge (quantity) of goods. One such factory that | know
makes pots, plates and (dish). Another factory owned by a woman makes cotton
(dress) for (baby). Today, many women run big (business) like banks and (library).
Women also now take part in many sports and (hobby); winning many (trophy)
just like men.

Capital letters

Look at this sentence from Zimbabwe's birthday (Part 1)

Some of the heroes buried at the Heroes’ Acre in Harare are Herbert Chitepo,

Josiah Tongogara, and Jason Moyo.

We always start with a capital letter when we write:

* names of people, for example, Jason Moyo, Josiah Magama Tongogara

* the proper full names of places and things. for example, The National Heroes’
Acre is in Harare.

Chizarira Game Reserve

Beit Bridge is on the border between Zimbabwe and South Africa.

Lake Mutirikwi is near the Great Zimbabwe Ruins.

Rewrite the following passage correctly putting in capital letters:

Zimbabwe's places of interest

Our country zimbabwe has many places of interest. one famous place of interest
is the Victoria falls on the zambezi river. other places of interest on the zambezi
river are the big kariba dam and the mana pools.

many people who like to see wild animals visit the hwange national park. Those
who like to see beautiful country-side go to the eastern highlands or the matopo
hills outside the city of bulawayo. many people also visit the great zimbabwe ruins
near the city of masvingo or the chinhoyi caves in chinhoyi.

Writing a story
A story is good when it is told or written in good order. Good order means saying
the first things first, then the next, and so on until the last.

Mpho wrote the life story of one of the heroes of Zimbabwe below. The order is
mixed up. Rewrite the story in good order. The years will help you.


--- Page 52 ---
Herbert Chitepo

In 1962 Herbert Chitepo fled the country and went to Tanzania.
On 18 April 1975 Herbert Chitepo was killed by a bomb in Lusaka, Zambia.
IN 1954 Cnitepo became Ine country's Tirst Yack \awyer.
After independence, Chitepo’s remains were re-buried at the Heroes’ Acre in
Harare.
In 1963 Chitepo was elected Chairman of ZANU.
Following his death, Chitepo was buried in Zambia.
Chitepo was first buried in Zambia where he died.
Herbert Chitepo was born in Nyanga District on 15 June 1923.
In 1966 Chitepo moved from Tanzania to live in Lusaka, Zambia.
In 1949 he got his first university degree.

A short play to act.

A birthday party

In groups of ten act a play on the birthday party of one of you. In the play:
- one is the child with the birthday
- one is the announcer of what is happening at the birthday,
- the rest are the friends and relatives.

Using before and after

Look at this short paragraph:

This country changed its name to Zimbabwe in the year 1980. Before 1980, this
country was called Southern Rhodesia. Harare, the capital city was called
Salisbury. The name of the capital city was changed from Salisbury to Harare after
independence.

Note:

» we use before for events that happened or happen earlier

» we use after for events that happened or happen later

Using the words before and after, answer these questions in full correct sentences:
1. What was Zimbabwe known as before 19807?

2. What was the name of the capital city before independence?

3. When was the name Southern Rhodesia dropped?

4. When did Salisbury become known as Harare?



--- Page 53 ---
Write one sentence using each one of these phrases:
- before | go to school
- after school
- before | go to bed
- after the heavy rains
ho - before the end of the month
ib - - after | greeted the teacher
- before (eating) meals



--- Page 54 ---
Revision and assessment 5

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about our country, Zimbabwe.

Our country, Zimbabwe

Our country, Zimbabwe is in the continent of Africa. Zimbabwe is a land-locked
country. This means it has no sea coastline. It is sumounded by other countries
which are: Zambia to the north; Mozambique to the east; South Africa to the
south; and Botswana to the west. Zimbabwe has many towns and cities. These
include Harare, Bulawayo, Mutare, Masvingo, Gweru, Kadoma, Kwekwe, Bindura,
Chinhoyi, Marondera, Chivhu, and Hwange. The capital city of Zimbabwe is Harare.
This is where the main government offices are. The office of the president of the
country is in the capital city. Before independence in the year 1980, Zimbabwe
was known as Rhodesia. Then, the city of Harare was known as Salisbury.

Take turns to tell the class about our country, Zimbabwe.

od, Read

Take turns to read aloud the passage Our country, Zimbabwe in Listen above.
Read fluently pausing where there is a comma, and stopping where there is a full
stop.

4 Write |

After reading the passage Our country, Zimbabwe above, answer these
questions in full, comrect sentences:

In which continent is our country, Zimbabwe?

What does it mean to say that Zimbabwe is land-locked?

Which country is to the west of Zimbabwe?

If you cross Zimbabwe's northern border, which country do you go into?
What do you find in the capital city of a country?

pow =



--- Page 55 ---
Pen-friends

Listen

Your teacher will tell you about pen-friends.

Read

Pen-friends (Part 1)

pen-friend district rural season peaceful quiet
expensive wild breathing urban among

A girl wrote the following paragraphs. She put them in a newspaper.



--- Page 56 ---
| am looking for a pen-friend. My name is Sekai Baloyi. | am a girl aged nine. |
go to Chilonga School in Chiredzi District. That is where | live with my parents.
We see many wild animals from the Gona-re-Zhou Game Park.

This year | am in Grade Three. | like the life in the rural areacs. It is quiet and
peaceful. There is no noise from cars, buses, lorries and trains. Life in the rural
areas is not as expensive as life in the city. This is because we grow our own
food crops.

There are beautiful hills, trees and streams in the rural area. In the rainy season
the trees have green leaves and beautiful flowers. | enjoy listening fo the
birds singing in the trees. | enjoy fishing in the streams with clean water. | like
watching the red sun setting behind the hills in the west. | enjoy breathing the
fresh air among the many green trees and bushes.

= Write
ms

Answer these questions.

How old is Sekai?

Where does Sekai Baloyi live?

Who does Sekai Baloyi live with?

To which school does Sekai Baloyi go?

Is Sekai Baloyi a rural child or a city child?

SUE

Using likes or dislikes
Do you think Sekai Baloyi likes or dislikes life in the rural areas? Why do you say so?
Say it like this:

| think Sekai likes/dislikes life in the rural areas because

Listen

The silent t in words

Listen as your teacher says these two sentences that Sekai Baloyi wrote:
| enjoy listening to the birds singing in the trees.
| enjoy watching the sun setting behind the hills in the west.

The letter t is silent in both listening and watching.



--- Page 57 ---
Say the lines of the poem below correctly after your teacher. It has some words
with the silent 1.

Listening 6 and watching the birds

Stretched and sitting in my mother’s thatched iteher)
| often scratch my ears and listen to the birds
As they whistle and sing their endless songs ,

And when | hasten out of my mother’ 5s thatched kitchen
To fetch the Christmas eggs if they have been fiche,
1 often stretch my neck and watch

The birds with their wings outstretched

As they caich the flying insects

Aboie my a 5 thatched hilehion.

A question to discuss:
Do you think this poem is talking about the rural areas or the urban areas? Give
reasons why you say so.

> 74
2d, Read and write =

Using because
Sekai says that life in the rural areas is not as expensive as in the city. Then she says:
This is because we grow our own food crops.

Read this short paragraph aloud:

Tendai and Sifiso are friends. They live in different villages separated by a river.
One day Tendai wanted to visit Sifiso, but she could not go at once because it was
raining outside. When the rain stopped Tendai walked out. She could not cross
the river because it was in flood.

Because is used when we say the reason why.



--- Page 58 ---
Use because to join the first part of the sentence in the box on the left with the
suitable second part of the sentence in the box on the right.

we are their children.

it was too small for me.

| want to hear everything said.

| was left alone at home.

the sky was covered with clouds.
1 was not feeling well.

| am afraid of falling down.

they are all people.

1 | was absent from school
2 We did not see the sun rise
3 | do not climb tall trees
4. Boys and girls are the same
5. Our parents love us
6
7
8

because

| listen very carefully
Last night, | was very afraid
| could not wear the shirt

Using the -ing in some short verbs

Read this short paragraph:

Yesterday afternoon my mother and | went out shopping. Mother bought a new.
costume for swimming and a pair of scissors for cutting papers. She also bought a
pair of sports shoes for me. The shoes are for running. We returned home when the
sun was setting.

Some short verbs double the last letter before adding —ing.
e.g. swim — swimming; cut — cutting; run- running

Rewrite the following sentences correctly with the -ing of the verbs in brackets.
Double the last letter before adding -ing.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

| don't like fo waste my time (sit) here.

The boys stopped (dig) when it was (get) dark.

Some people are afraid of (travel) by aeroplane.

This month our school team has been (win) all its games.

He was (cut) a branch when the whole tree fell down.

It started raining when father was still (put) up the fent.

The strong wind was blowing and (shut) the doors and the windows.
While the boys were (run) the girls were (swim).

More practice using because
Look at these two sentences:
We did not go outside to play because of the rain.
Because of the rain, we did not go outside to play.
Note that the two sentences are two ways of saying the same thing.



--- Page 59 ---
A game to play in pairs:
Using because, learner A says a sentence in one way. Then, also using because,
learner B says the same thing in another way.

Imagine that you are looking for a pen-friend.
Write your own paragraphs to a newspaper like what Sekai Baloyi did.



--- Page 60 ---
Pen-friends (Part 2

exciting choose life reply events happening wherever

Sekai Baloyi got this reply in the next newspaper:

| would like to be your pen-friend, Sekai. My name is Dennis Moyo. | am
a boy aged ten. | am in Grade Four at Hilltop Primary School in Kwekwe.
| live with my parents in Kwekwe. Kwekwe is a city between Gweru and
Kadoma. | like to live in town. Town life is different from rural life. Town life
is very easy and exciting. There are many interesting events happening
in town. You can choose which school, hospital, church or store to go to.
There is good transport to take you wherever you want to go to.

Sekai Baloyi and Dennis Moyo became good pen-friends. They were
writing fo one another every month.

Answer these questions.

hw =

Is Dennis Moyo a boy or a girl?

How old is Dennis Moyo?

Where does Dennis Moyo live?

To which school does Dennis Moyo go?

Is Dennis Moyo a rural child or a city child?



--- Page 61 ---
Using likes or dislikes
Do you think Dennis Moyo likes or dislikes town life? Why do you say so?

Writing about oneself

Sekai Baloyi and Dennis Moyo wrote about themselves. You want to be Sekai
Baloyi's pen-friend, just like Dennis Moyo. Write your own newspaper reply to the
paragraph written by Sekai Baloyi. (see how Dennis Moyo wrote his reply) You
should write your pagaraphs in 8 = 12 lines.

Speak and write: Extra mile |

More about nouns.

Read these two sentences aloud:

1. In the rainy season the frees have green leaves.
we say one leaf many leaves.

Rule: drop the f and replace it with -ves.

Say the word for many for the following nouns by adding -ves.

life thief half wolf shelf leaf wife calf knife

2. People use straight poles to build the roofs of their huts.
We say one roof many roofs
Rule: add -s to the noun

Say the word for many for the following nouns by adding -s.

chief cliff roof belief dwarf hoof cuff

The words for many -
Rewrite the following paragraph changing the words in brackets to mean many.

A funny belief

People have many strange (belief). One belief is that there were very small people
called (dwarf) who lived very long (life). The (dwarf) spent all their (life) working
for their (chief) who had many (wife) each. It is said the (dwarf) built their huts only
on (cliff). They used dry palm (leaf) fo thatch the (roof). They kept (wolf) and ate


--- Page 62 ---
the meat of their (calf} only. They cut the (calf) into (half) using sharp (knife). Then
they ate half of the meat and left the rest on wooden (shelf) for their gods. But it is
believed that the (thief) would come at night and take away the meat from the
wooden (shelf). The (chief) did not allow the (dwarf) to eat the meat from animals
with (hoof) like goats, sheep or cattle.

Read aloud the paragraph you have written.

between and among
Sekai Baloyi wrote:
| enjoy breathing fresh air among the many trees and bushes.
(among more than two trees)
Dennis Moyo wrote:
Kwekwe is a city between Gweru and Kadoma.
(between two cities)

Rule: we use between for two things; and among for more than two things.
Complete the sentences using between or among.

1. Ishared the sweets the two boys.

2. Father shared the oranges — the five girls.

3. Ourschoolis — the clinic and the church.

4. My brotherwas the passengers on the bus.

5. Whois older you two girls?

6. lam the youngest —_______ the learners in my class.

7. The learners in our group were talking themselves.
8. He cut himself his eyes.

9. Which city is bigger —___ Bulawayo and Harare?

10. That boy likes to stay the girls.

A letter to a pen-friend

In 3 - 4 paragraphs write a letter to your pen-friend telling him/her about an
important community project that the people in your area are working on.
Examples of community projects are:

planting trees moulding bricks

market gardening digging a water-well

keeping poultry building a school

building a clinic digging a trench for water pipes

building a bridge



--- Page 63 ---
Tell your pen-friend how the project is going to help the people in your community.
Remember that a letter has:

* an address and the date

a greeting which says: Dear
the body of the letter in paragraphs.

an ending, which says: Your loving friend
your name at the end.

Begin by saying:
| am happy to write this letter to you telling you about a
area where | live.

in the

More practice with: between and among
Re-write the following paragraph filling in: between or among
When | saw some boys playing football, | went there to look for my brother.
| was sure to find him the football players. First | looked for him
the two goal-posts. He was not there. Then | saw him the many players on
the field. There was a distance of about ten metres me and where he was
standing. | called out his name. But he could not see me because | was standing
a large number of spectators. Just then the ball came rolling out of the field
my two legs. When my brother ran over to pick the ball that is when he saw
the spectators.

me

Using since

Look at these sentences:
He has been working since morning.
It has been raining since yesterday.
I have lived here since | was born.

Note:
We use since for saying from a particular point in time until now.
(a) Using since, complete these sentences:

It has not rained here -_—
I have not seen my friend -_—
The children have been singing -_
My brother has been a farmer _—
He has been travelling by bus EE.

hwON-—

(b) Make your own sentences using since.

b . B



--- Page 64 ---
End of term 1 revision and assessment

Listen and speak

The a sound asin at/man/mad/happy |
Listen to your teacher's model reading of the poem below. Afterwards say what
this poem is talking about. Take turns to recite the poem.

The happy man

Al sunset

As Lran in the sand near the dom

| saw ¢ happy man with a black hat
And a handbag in his hand.

I'm glad

That the happy man
Was not a mad man;
For he looked at me
Happily.

Then the happy man
Sat on a fiat mat in the sand
With four other happy men,
And began to tak to them J
Happily as they drank %
From an old clay pot.

| looked at the happy man
Again and again
Then | saw
That the happy man,
“With a black hat
Was in fact,
My dad.
Back from
One of his many trips.



--- Page 65 ---
|

=e

Paper 1

Read

The Lion and the Mouse

Lion had been hunting in the forest all morning. He did not kill any animal.
So he was hungry. He was also very fired. He lay down in the shade of a
big free and fell asleep.

Then Little Mouse came along. He wanted to get into his hole, but Lion
was sleeping on top of the hole. So Mouse could not go into his hole. Little
Mouse then ran on Lion's body. His little legs scratched Lion's body. This
awakened the sleeping lion.

Lion grabbed Little Mouse in his big paws. He wanted to swallow little
Mouse. The little Mouse cried for mercy. He cried, "Please forgive me. One
day | may be able to help you.” So Lion let little Mouse go.

Then one day Lion was hunting again. Then he was caught in the nets of
the hunter. Little Mouse came along and cut the nets with his small sharp
teeth. He cut a big hole. Lion was able to get out of the hunter's nets.



--- Page 66 ---
in numbers 1 - 6 choose the correct answer.
1. Lion was tired because he had

A. fallen asleep B. been hunting all morning
C. killed a big animal D. afraid of the hunters

2. This story shows that lions .
A. feed on leaves and grass B. are very friendly to people
C. feed on meat D. have sharp teeth

3. The mouse could not get into its hole becaus¢ ———.
A. Lion was sleeping on it B. it was afraid of the lion
C. there was a net D. there was no hole

4. Which is true?
A. The lion was killed by the hunters
B. The lion killed the mouse
C. The mouse was caught in the nets
D. The mouse saved the lion
5. For Lion and Mouse, this story —
A. has a sad ending B. has a happy ending
C. shows that lions are dangerous ~~ D. was told by the hunter
6. This story shows that if you are good to others, they will one day

A. forget you B. help you

C. ask for mercy D. run away from you
In numbers 7 - 11 which word has a different sound from the others?
7. A. cat B. hat C. set D. sat
8. A. donkey B. monkey C. money D. honey
9. A. hip B. whip C. sheep D. ship
10. A. look B. broom C. cook D. wood
11. A. height B. light C. white D. wheat

In numbers 12 - 16 choose the right word to fill in the space.

12. Some learners go to school bus.
A. in B. with C. by D. on
13. In class | sit Janet and Peter.
A. to B. among C. for D. between
14. My shirt is different ———— YOUrs.
A. with B. by C. from D. to
15. The lessons start eight o'clock in the morning.
A. in B. af C. to D. for
16.1 go to school foot.
A. on B. by C. with D. under

In numbers 17 — 20 choose the right word to complete the sentence.

17. We boilwaterina . (A. cattle/B. kettle)

18. A shepherd looks after — ———. (A. ship/B. sheep)
19. My dog sleeps near puppies. (A. ifs/B. it's)
20. visited my auntlast — (A. week/B. weak)
21. twas cold to play outside. (A. to/B. too)



--- Page 67 ---
In numbers 22 - 24 choose the correct verb to fill in the space.

22. lenjoy —_____ television. (A.watch B. watches C. waiching)
23. Every nightourdog ——___. (A.bark B. barks C. barking)
24. Mary herself everyday. ( A. washes B. washing C. wash)
In numbers 24 - 29 choose the correct answer to fill in the space.
25. | did not hearwhatwassaid of the noise.

A. and B. because C. when D. as
26. In the word: know which letter is silent?

A. k B. n C. o D. w
27.A sells meat in a butchery.

A. shepherd B. farmer C. baker ~~ D. butcher
28.Adog —

A. Crows B. barks C. roars D. mews
29.1 understood everythingthatwas at the meeting.

A. said B. says C. saying D. say

In number 30 choose one sentence that is correctly written.
30. A. themba james and john are my brothers

B. Themba James and John are my brothers.

C. Themba, James and John are my brothers.

D. Themba, James and, John are my brothers

Paper 2

Old Mugeyi and his two sons

Old Mugeyi was a widower. His wife had died many years back. He lived
in a small brick house with his two sons: Bhebhe the hunter and Jani, the
sherpherd.

One morning Old Mugeyi called his older son, Bhebhe. He said to Bhebhe,
“Go info the forest. Cut some firewood for me. | want to make a big fire to
warm myself in the evenings.”

Bhebhe replied, "| will do that.” After that Bhebhe went into the forest with
his spear. He spent the whole day hunting. Af sunset Bhebhe returned home
with no firewood. Old Mugeyi was disappointed.



--- Page 68 ---
The next day Old Mugeyi said to Jani, "Go and cut some firewood for me.”
Jani just listened without saying a word. Afterwards, Jani went into the forest
with his flock of sheep. While the sheep were grazing. Janicutsome firewood.
At sunset Jani brought home a big bundle of dry firewood. This pleased Old
Mugeyi very much.

Answer the following questions in full, correct sentences.

1. Whatisa widower?

2. Where did Old Mugeyi live?

3. How many children did Old Mugeyi have?

4. Who was the older of the two sons?

5. Of the two sons who was the hunter?

6. Of the two sons who was the sherpherd?

7. What did Old Mugeyi want the firewood for?

8. Why was Old Mugeyi disappointed?

9. What pleased Old Mugeyi at the end?

10. (0) Which of the two sons Was good fo his father?
(b) Why do you say he was good fo his father?

eee


--- Page 69 ---
Choose only one of the questions below.

1. In 8 - 12 lines write a composition under the heading My best friend. The
campasition should be in 3 - 4 paragraphs on the following:

your friend's name, sex, age. home, church, mother language

what he/she looks like, (for example, complexion/hair/size/face/head/
legs etc.)

what you do together (for example, games, work, learning, visits etc.)
his/her likes and dislikes (for example, what kind of people, foods, clothes
etc.)

why you like your friend (for example, helpful, kind, clever, strong, smart
etc.)

2. Last week a very important person visited your area and held a meeting with
the people.

Write a letter to your friend telling him/her about the visit and the meeting. Your
letter should be 8 — 10 lines long. It should be in 3 - 4 paragraphs.

In your letter, write about:

* the name of the person who visited, day, how he/she came, for example, by
car or helicopter

* the meeting: where, the people who attended, how the meeting started,
what was said, what was agreed, how the meeting ended.

In 8 — 12 lines write a composition under the heading Our school.

In your composition write 3 — 4 paragraphs about:

its name, where it is, for example area/district, place
the school head, the teachers, the learners

its buildings, its grounds and gardens, its sumoundings
why you like your school or why you dislike your school.


--- Page 70 ---
Pet animals are our friends

The greedy pet dog

greedy bush chicken stream crossing pet decided
dropped sank jaws waves angry bottom whole

One day a greedy pet dog stole a whole chicken from a kitchen and ran into
the bush. With the chicken in its jaws, the greedy pet dog came to a stream
with water. Before crossing the stream, the pet dog stopped and looked down |
into the water. There in the water, the greedy pet dog saw what looked like
another dog also with a chicken in its jaws. The greedy pet dog decided to
have that other chicken in the jows of the dog it saw in the water,

The greedy pet dog opened its jaws to bark at the dog in the water. The chicken
dropped into the water, making waves. The chicken sank to the bottom of the
water. After the water waves had settled the greedy pet dog saw the other §
dog in the water, this time with no chicken in its jaws. The greedy pet dog was

very angry with itself. :



--- Page 71 ---
Answer these questions.

Was the dog in this story a good dog or a bad dog? Why?

What do you think the dog saw in the water? Another dog or itself?
Did the greedy dog eat the chicken it had stolen? What happened?
What do we learn from this story?

PW

Writing good stories

One day a greedy pet dog stole a whole chicken and ran into the bush.
It's good to start a story or the news with: One day
You may also begin your story with these:
* Last week / month / year
* Onedark night
* On Sunday / Saturday / Tuesday
* Two days ago / week ago / months ago
Write your own short story with any of the beginnings above. Start like this:

| heard our dog barking without stopping.

Then write the short story with the help of the following questions and lines:
What did you think at first? When you looked, what did you see? So, what was the
dog barking ai?

Some notes to help you:

Dogs bark at many things, like: baboons in the garden/fields, strangers walking
past your home, a thief or robber, animals like cattle and so on.

Listen

Say this sentence correctly after your teacher.

The pet dog saw what looked like another dog, also with a chicken in its jaws.
The letter a in the words: saw, jaw, talk, small and stalk has the same sound.
Read and learn to recite the poem below. The bold a has the same sound as in
saw:

3



--- Page 72 ---
The hawk and the rat

As | lay all by myself on the lawn under
the pawpow free one warm dawn,

| saw a small rat with raw stalks of
grass in its small jows.

With its small paws, the small rat was
about to crawl up the tall walls of the
big hall.

Then, as | was yawning | saw a big
hawk in the sky above the tall walls of
the big hall.

With awesome speed. the big hawk
swooped down like a falling ball.

And without warning, picked the small
rat with its sharp claws.

speak and write IY

Verbs can tell us that something happened in the past.
Look at this sentence from the story The greedy pet dog.
The pet dog looked down into the water. (looked comes from look)

We add -ed to the verb look to show that this happened in the past, like:
yesterday, last week, last month, last year, some time ago and so on.

(i) The pictures below show what happened.
Tell the class what happened in each picture beginning with the words given.
Remember this happened in the past so we add -ed to the action words
(verbs)

Yesterday, the girl | Last week, the boys [On Sunday, the horse [This morming. mother



--- Page 73 ---
(i) A reporting game for all
The teacher tells one learner to do one action only at a time:
for example, “Anna, laugh aloud.”

Then teacher asks: What did Anna do? Tell the class.
Another learner tells the class: “Anna laughed aloud.”

When telling the class what happened in the past we add -ed to the verb to
show that it happened in the past.

(ii) Rewrite these sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.

Yesterday my brother (boil) some eggs for us.

| (greet) father on his return from work last night.

She (polish) her shoes last week.

Last Sunday we (pray) for rain.

Last year the learners in my class (work) very hard.

Mother (wait) for the bus yesterday morning. |
Long ago, people (cross) the big rivers in wooden boats.

Last holiday | (visit) my friend in the city.

Noh LON~

Using before and after
The three pictures show what mother did, first, second and third.

i: Next, other eats her
First, mother washes her food after washing her Lastly, mother brushes
hands before eating her hands. She eats before her teeth after eating her
food. brushing her teeth. food.

(i) Answer these questions from the pictures above.
What did mother do before eating the food?
What did mother do after eating the food?
What must you do before eating food?
What must you do after eating food?

hoON =



--- Page 74 ---
(i) Rewrite these sentences filling in before or after in the empty spaces.
You should knock first you open the door.

All the rivers were full the heavy rains.

This school was built long many of us were born.

It gets dark sunset and we cannot play the outside games.
Please do not get out of the bus it has stopped moving.

She made some tea for us boiling some water on the fire.
You should look out for motor-cars crossing that busy road.
kiling the dangerous snake, we burnt it.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Using: each other / one another

Look at these two sentences.
My brother helps my sister. My sister also helps my brother.

We can say the two sentences as one sentence like this:
My brother and sister help each other. (or) My brother and sister help one
another.

(a) Using each other / one another join every pair of sentences below into one
sentence

The boys were talking to the girls. The girls were talking fo the boys.

Jonas is playing with Kuda. Kuda is playing with Jonas.

Agnes looks like her sister. Her sister also looks like Agnes.

James thanked Peter. Peter also thanked James.

The wife greeted her husband. The husband also greeted his wife.

You help me. | help you.

The bus collided with a lorry. The lorry collided with the bus.

In class, Maria sits close to Jane. Jane sits close fo Maria.

Because of the noise, Sam could not hear me. | could not hear Sam.

10. Sarah was angry with her brother. The brother was angry with Sarah.

VON AWN

(b) Say your own sentence using each other/one another.

More about the opposite gender

Look at these two sentences
A woman whose husband has died is called a widow.
A man whose wife has died is called a widower.

The opposite gender of widow is widower.

(0) Re-write the sentences below, replacing the underlined male name with its
correct (opposite gender) (female name) from this box:

mayoress actress air-hostess manageress prophetess shepherdess priestess bride

1. When | grow up, | would like to be an air-host.
2 | read an interesting story about a famous prophet.



--- Page 75 ---
© NOOO AW

The bridegroom was smiling throughout the wedding.
The city now has a new mayor.

The shepherd was looking after the flock of sheep.
The best actor in the play got a prize.

There is a new priest at the local church.

That hair salon is under a good manager.

(b) Say each of the new sentences you have re-wriiten.

A game to play in pairs:

Imagine that you are looking for a pet dog at the SPCA (Society for the Protection
and Care of Animals).

One learner takes the place of the person in charge at the SPCA asking the
questions below.

Another learner answers the questions in full, correct sentences. You may give
more information in each case.

SPCA person:
You:
SPCA person:
You:
SPCA person:
You:

SPCA person:

You:

SPCA person:

You:
SPCA person:
You:

SPCA person:

You:

SPCA person:

You:

SPCA person:

You:

SPCA person:

You:

Hello! Good morning. Who are you; and what can | do for you?
What do you want apet dog for?

What kind of pet are you looking for?

Do you want a male or a female pet dog?

How old is the pet dog you are looking for?

Where do you live; and where will you keep the pet dog?
What wil you feed the pet dog? ~~

Have you had any pet dogs before?

What name will you give to the pet dog that | will give you
today?

Come inside and choose the pet dog you like from these.



--- Page 76 ---
More about pet animals

Pets

pet friend strangers bark different
popular monkeys ticks shelter cruel
protection donkeys diseases humans

A pet is an animal that is kept as a
friend. When people get lonely,
pets are sometimes their only
friends. Pet dogs are sometimes
kept for protection. A good pet
dog will bark af, or even bite
strangers.

Animals kept for work or for sports
are not pefs. Race horses are
therefore, not pets. Donkeys that
are kept to pull carts are not pets.
Animals that are kept for their meat
or milk are also not pets.

The two most popular pets are
dogs and cats, but some people

also keep birds, as pets. Even other wild animals that we usually see in the bush |
such as lions, baboons, and monkeys are sometimes kept as pets in people's §
homes. 4

Pets can cause injuries fo their owners. Sometimes pets bite their owners or other
people. Pets can also bring ticks and flies into the homes, causing diseases to |
their owners. Pets are like human beings. They like good shelter from the cold |
weather or the rain or the hot sun. They also like good food and clean living §
places. It is cruel fo kick or beat pets. Ie



--- Page 77 ---
What is a pet?

Are pets kept for their meat?

Which pet is also kept for protection?
What is cruel to do to a pet?

Can wild animals be kept as pets?
Which are the two most popular pets?

AATF Sl a

Discuss in your groups then answer this question:
Do you think the person who wrote this passage likes pets or dislikes pets?
Why do you say so?

Did you understand the passage about pets?
Now complete the statements below.

Itisright —— or Itiswrong
— forpeople to keep pets in their homes.
for people to protect their pets from bad weather.
for people to kick or beat their pets.
for pet dogs to bark at strangers.
for people to keep wild animals as pets.
for pets to be given good food.
for pets to be treated like humans.

Nook =

a

verbs that end with the letter -e, for example, love, smile,
Read this short paragraph telling us what happened in the past:

Last year | behaved very well in class and my teacher really liked that. Even the

other learners in my class praised me for that. My teacher promised to give me

a prize for that. Then, last week my teacher decided to give me the prize of a

story book. Yesterday the story book arrived from the book-shop. | smiled when |

received the new book from my teacher. Last night | read one of the stories in the

book. It is a story about how a widow raised her family of six children all by herself.
A widow is a woman whose husband has died. The widow loved all her children

and worked very hard for them.



--- Page 78 ---
Rule: for verbs that end with the letter e just add -d when saying things thar
happened in the past, for example, Now | smile — Yesterday | smiled

Rewrite these sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.

Last night father (arrive) home lafe.

A long time ago, God (create) the world.

At mid-night, a thief (force) his way into the shop.

Many, many years ago people (live) in caves.

This morning my sister (decide) to go to school by bicycle.

When | was a baby | (love) my mother's milk.

When she was young she (hate) dogs.

When it was raining, we (waste) a lot of water; now there is no water left in the
tank.

ONO AWN

Lo] Read and Speak

The sound of the letter v

say these sentences correctly after your teacher:

(a) The two most popular pets are dogs and cats, but some people also keep
birds, and even snakes as pets.

(b) Even other wild animals that we see in the bush are sometimes kept as pets.

The u in but has a different sound from the u in bush.

Repeat this poem. Take note of the sound of the vu in the different words.

The u has the same sound as in bush. The rest have the same sound as in but.

When the bus breaks down |
When the school bus breaks down, |
We pull and push up the slope;
Push and pull in the dust or mud
Pull and push in our big numbers.
When the school bus breaks down,
And we must just go fo school,
We brush our rubber shoes and
put them on.
And run and hurry past the
club huts.
We take the short-cut that
runs through the bush.
But it’s not fun to run under
the hot sun,
As we hurry at full speed
to school
. Even when there's thunder
in summer.

Br at SECT
$x v



--- Page 79 ---
-
F

Using: afew, a little
Read this paragraph:

A few days ago, | went to the small dom near my home. The dam is a few metres
from the main road. A few years ago, this dam had a lot of water and a little sand
at the sides. Now there is a lot of sand and a little water left in the small dam.

We use a few for things that we can count and a little for things that we cannot
count.

Rewrite the following sentences filling in (a few), or (a little) in the blank spaces:
Your father is just —_ years older than my father.

Mother likes herteawith ______ sugarinit.

He is now a very old man with hair left on his head.

There are days left before schools close for the long holidays.
There was rainfall last week.

Qur class has girls and many boys.

| cut my fingerand lost — blood.

Boiled eggs taste good with salt.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Under the heading My pet dog, write _three paragraphs about your pet dog by
answering these questions below in full, correct sentences.

My pet dog
Begin 1st paragraph by saying: :
| have a pet dog called —. Who gave you this pet dog, when? Is it a

female or a male dog? How old is your pet dog now?

2nd paragraph:

Is your pet dog big or small in size?

Is your pet dog fat or thin? What colour is your pet dog? Are its ears and eyes big
or small?

3rd paragraph:

What do you feed your pet dog on? Do you sometimes take a walk with your pet
dog? What does your pet dog do when if sees strangers or other dogs? Do you like
your pet dog very much?



--- Page 80 ---
Using in and into

Look at this short paragraph:
There were a few people in the hall. But more people were walking into the hall.
The air in the hall was hot. So the windows were opened. A cool wind started
blowing into the hall. More fresh air was now coming into the hall. Then the air
in the hall became cool. This was good for the many people now in the hall.

Note: in means already inside a place or a container.

info means moving from outside to the inside of a place or a container.

(a) Complete these sentences with in or into.

VON RLN~

Go and throw the rubbish the rubbish pit.
The people the church were singing.
The ratran — the hole.
Theriver flows the dam near the school.
There are many farmers my home district.
Father keeps his money the bank.
He dropped the bottle anditbroke many small pieces.
Mother added some sugar her tea.
There are more girls than boys —_______ our class.
10. My father keeps his cellphone —_____ his pocket.

(b) Say your own sentences with in or into.



--- Page 81 ---
y UNIT The boy called Thulani

Listen and speak

Your teacher will tell you about his journey by bus. Listen carefully. Answer the
§ questions that your teacher will ask you.

Read
The boy called Thulani
parents rural peasant sorghum during
uncle aunt nephew butcher piece
holidays visit weekends excited

Thulani lives with his parents in the rural areas. His parents are peasant farmers
there. They have a small piece of land. On this piece of land they grow some
sorghum and maize. Thulani's parents also keep a few cattle and goats. After
school and during weekends Thulani looks after the cattle and the goats.

During the school holidays
Thulani is going to visit his
uncle and aunt. MrMpofu
is Thulani’s uncle; and Mrs
Mpofu is his aunt. Thulani
is Mr and Mrs Mpofu's
nephew. Mr Mpofu and
his family live in the city of
Bulawayo. Mr Mpofu is a
butcher there. A butcher
sells meat in a building.
Thulani has never been
{ to a large city before. So
he is very excited about
going to Bulawayo.



--- Page 82 ---
Choose the correct answer

1.

Thulani is excited about going fo Bulawayo becavsehe — —— —.
A. was going to eat lofs of meat B. has never been to a large city before
C. was herding catile and goats D. hasbeen to Bulawayo before

2. Who livesin Bulawayo?

A. Thulani B. Thulani and his parents.
C. Thulani's parents C. Mr and Mrs Mpofu.

3. When is Thulani going fo Bulawayo?
A. During the school holidays. B. During the weekend.
C. After school. D. Tomorrow.

4. This story shows that Thulani i$ ——————
A. a peasant farmer. B. the son of a butcher.
C. a schoolboy. D. not a schoolboy.

Listen 7] speak and read od,

the long a: in ar
Listen as the teacher says this sentence from the story The boy called Thulani.

Thulani's parents are peasant farmers.

The words: are and farmers, have ar: which hasalong a: sound

(iy Repeatthe lines of this poem after your teacher. Remember the blue ar in the

words have along a sound.
Look at the poem in the box again. Say all the words with the underlined ar
in the poem.

| often

. 1 often march fo the market before it starts to get dark

Not just to buy o jar of fresh milk from the farms far away.

~ Butfosee the smart guards as they march just before it stars To get dark.
The smart guards look after the cars parked in the car park of the market.
There are always large and small cars in the car park of the large market;

And when the large dogs of the smart guards bark and charge of me,
run into the large arms of one of the smart guards.
with my heart beating fast.



--- Page 83 ---
These words are in the story The boy called Thulani.
butcher uncle city peasant aunt

Fill in the blank spaces with the words above.

1. Alarge town like Bulawayo is called a

2. A sells meatin a butchery.

3. Aisa farmer with a small piece of land.
4. Your father’s or mother’s brother is your

5. Your father's or mother's sister is your

EY) Listen and speak

The silent e

Listen as your teacher says these sentences from the story The boy called Thulani:
Thulani's parents also keep a few cattle.
Mr Mpofu is Thulani's uncle.

In the words cattle and uncle, the e is silent.

(i) Say the lines of the poem below. Note that the underlined e is silent.



--- Page 84 ---
~ Amistake

| made a istake on Tuesday
~ And gsked my uncle for six cents only.

. To buy one ripe apple in a fruit store.

"| should have asked for nine cenfs =
For that was the true price of one apple.
| had read the price as 6 instead of 9.
Because [read the 9 upside down.

Paragraphs
Look at the first paragraph in the story The boy called Thulani. The paragraph tells
us where Thulani lives and a few other things about Thulani.

Write a short paragraph about where you live by answering these questions in full
sentences:

Where | live

Do you live in the rural areas or in an urban area? What is the area you live in
called? sit a hilly, fiat, wet or dry area? In which district is the area you live in?
ls there a road, a stream, or a river that passes through the area where you live?
Who do you live with? Are there many or d few people in the area you live in?
Would you say the area you live in is a quiet or a noisy area? Do you enjoy or dislike
living in that area?

A game fo play in groups: A dialogue
In a dialogue two or more people are talking or discussing.

Imagine that you are on d bus fravelling to the city. The learners in your group are
the other passengers you are travelling with on the same bus. The bus makes a
stop at a famous place. The famous place could be: a school, bridge, mountain,
township, farm, hospital, college. mine, dam or heritage site.

For example: the Great Zimbabwe Ruins, local Heroes’ Acre, Chinhoyi Caves or a
game park.



--- Page 85 ---
In your group, make a dialogue. In the diclogue you must give each other a
chance to speak about the place you have chosen.

You are also allowed to ask the people in your group. Things to talk about may
include: name of the place, what makes it famous, how the place helps the
people and the country, and so on.

Asking questions using: what, where, when, how, why.

Imagine that you are on the bus.

Write the questions that you may ask the passenger sitting next to you:
1. His/her name (the passenger sitting next fo you).

Where he/she is going.

The time the bus arrives in the city where you are going.

The average speed of the bus.

The name of the bus company that runs the bus.

Why the police keep stopping the bus.

The distance left, in kilometers to the city.

The number of passengers the bus is allowed to carry.

Why the bus should not carry standing passengers.

10. Why passengers should not throw litter through the bus windows.
11. Whether you may open/close the bus window beside you.

VENOM AWN

Using too

Look at these two sentences:

The river is wide; and very deep too. It has small fish and big fish too.
In the two sentences above, too means also.

Write five sentences of your own in which you use too to mean also.



--- Page 86 ---
Revision and assessment 7

Listen

Listen and answer these questions from your teacher in full, correct sentences:
Do you have friends?

Who is your best friend?

Is your friend at this school or at another school?

Where does your best friend live?

What game do you like to play with your friend?

When do you play with your best friend?

How often do you play with your friend?

Do you like your friend very much? Why?

How do you show that you like your best friend?

VON RON =

Read this short paragraph:

On Monday | was absent from school. Then on Tuesday | went back to school.
The teacher asked me why | did not come to school on Monday. | told him that
| was not feeling well. My friend asked me how | was feeling now. Sarah asked
me where | was all day on Monday. Kuda asked me what | was doing all day on
Monday. Peter asked me how | came to school in the morning. Maria asked me
if | did my home-work.

In the paragraph in Read above, | was asked six questions by different people.
Write the six questions correctly, in full. Remember to put the question mark at the
end of every question.



--- Page 87 ---
’ UNIT Thulani to the city

Db Read

Thulani goes to the city

fravelled passengers loudly cell phones pocket message
arrive mid-day travelling through fields grazing
monkeys branches buildings backwards pedestrians pavements
seemed grey hurry station minutes

When schools closed, Thulani travelled to Bulawayo. He travelled by bus.
There were many passengers on the bus. Some passengers were talking
loudly. Others were talking on their cell phones. Thulani pulled out his cell
phone from the pocket. He sent this message to his uncle, Mr Mpofu:

Now on the way to Byo. Hope to arrive around mid-day. Thulani.

The bus was travelling very fast. All the time Thulani was looking out through
the window. The bus went past hills and open fields. It crossed small streams
and wide rivers. Thulani saw goats, sheep and cattle grazing. He saw monkeys
and baboons on tree branches. The trees seemed to be running backwards.
Around mid-day the bus arrived in the large city of Bulawayo. There were
people, cars, lorries and buses on the wide streets. There were tall buildings
and street lights.



--- Page 88 ---
TT

There were pedestrians on the streets and on the pavements. Pedestrians are %
people travelling on foot. They all seemed to be in a hurry. After a few minutes, &
Mr Mpofu came to the bus station. He came in his big grey car. Together they |

drove to Mr Mpofu's house.

Comprehension

Choose the correct answer.
1. Thulani travelled to Bulawayo

A. inafast car B. on a bus with many passengers

C. at night D. on a bus with very few passengers
2. Thulani's journey to the city of Bulawayo.

A. was very boring B. took a whole day

C. was very slow D. was exciting
3. This passage shows that cell phones —

A. are very useful to many people B. cannot be used on buses

C. are for people in the towns only D. are for sending messages only
4. The story also tells us that life in the city is ———.

A. very fast B. very slow

C. better than life in the rural areas D. very quiet
5. What do you think the word Byo used by Thulani stands for?

A. Be careful B. Safe journey

C. Bulawayo D. Mr Mpofu’s other name

: 7
Speak and write =
=

More action words (verbs) for what happened in the past.
Look at the sentences below from the story Thulani goes to the city.

1. Together they drove to Mr Mpofu's house.
-the word drove comes from the verb drive.
drove tells us what happened in the past.
2. He sent this message to his uncle, Mr Mpofu.
-the word sent comes from the verb send
sent tells us what happened in the past.
(i) Match the verbs in the box (a) with their past verbs in the box (b) using:
Todayl_——— and yesterday |



--- Page 89 ---
Say it like this: Today | drive and yesterday | drove.

(a)

come do drink eat give go run sing sit
speak tell wake write

(b)

ran sat came woke went told wrote drank did
sang ate spoke gave

(i) Rewrite these sentences with the correct form of the action words (verbs) in
brackets.
1. Last holiday Thulani (go) to the city.
2. Yesterday | (eat) some honey.
3. | (do) my homework yesterday in the afternoon.
4. This morning | (wake) up after sunrise.
5. Last week Jane (write) a letter to her friend.
6. The teacher (tell) us a funny story that | will not forget.
7. At the wedding we (drink) many soft drinks.
8. | (sit) down after greeting the teacher.
9. Mother (speak) to me on the phone yesterday.
10. Last Sunday the boys and girls (sing) in the church.

Adjectives: words that tell us about a noun
Look at these two sentences from the story: Thulani goes to the city
1. Mr Mpofu came to the bus station in his big, grey car.
the words big and grey are adjectives. They tell us about the car.

2. The bus crossed small streams and wide rivers.
The words small and wide are adjectives: they tell us about the streams and
the rivers.

(i) Read these short paragraphs and answer the questions that follow:

(a) One day in the first school term, the head teacher allowed the leamers to
come to school in their different clothes. Some girls came wearing long dresses
and others short skirts. Some of the girls had high shoes, others had flat shoes or
open sandals.

The boys too came wearing different clothes. Some were wearing yellow shirts,
old shirts and new shirts. Their shoes were brown or grey or white in colour.
One boy came walking on bare feet. The teachers too were wearing funny
clothes.

In the paragraph above, which words tell us about:
1. the school term when this happened?



--- Page 90 ---
2.
3.
4.
S.
é.

(iii) Using the correct adjectives
Choose the suitable adjective in the brackets.
1.

2. In the rainy season the frees have (easy, green) leaves.

3. During the holidays, | went on a (long, wide) journey by bus.
4. A crocodile is a (dangerous, dry) animal.

5 He fell from a tree and broke his (left, white) arm.

é.

7. The (poor. rich) man has a lot of money.

8. When it's cold, | put on a (warm, sad) jacket.

9
1

0. The (greedy, angry) dog steals meat from the kitchen.

the clothes the head teacher allowed the learners to wear on this day?
the shoes the girls were wearing?

the clothes the boys were wearing?

the feet of one of the boys who came walking to school on that day?
the clothes that the teachers were wearing on this day?

There is a (high, deep) wall round our school.

Last night we had a (happy. bright) moon.

A tortoise is a (fast, slow) animal.

Writing a composition

Imagine that during the school holidays you travelled by bus to the city of —
(name of the city).

You were going there to visit your aunt or uncle or elder brother or elder sister,
Mr/Mrs/Miss — (say the name of the person you were visiting) who works in that
city as a — (say the job).

On the way the bus made some stops fo drop off or pick up passengers.

Under the heading: A journey by bus write a composition about that journey in
4 paragraphs.

Write your composition by answering the following questions in full sentences:

1st paragraph
Where did you travel to during the school holidays, with who?

Say: During the school holidays, | travelledto — with
Who were you visiting there? How did you fravel?

2nd paragraph
What time did you board the bus? Were there a few or many other passengers
on that bus? What were some of the passengers doing on the way? Was the bus



--- Page 91 ---
travelling fast or slowly? Did the bus make some stops on the way? What did you
see along the way?

3rd paragraph

When did your bus arrive inthe cityof —_ ? What did you see when you
arrived in the big city? Who was waiting for you at the bus station? After greeting
you, what happened next?

Using shall and will

(a) In pairs, do this short dialogue

Learner 1: Shall | close the door, please?

Learner 2: Oh yes! There is too much wind from outside.

Learner 1: Oh! This door is too heavy for me. | cannot close it all by myself.
Will you please come and help me pull the door?

Learner 2: Oh yes! | shall pull from the bottom of the door.
Will you please pull from the top?

Learner 1: Nol! I shall pull from the bottom.
And you will pull from the top.

Learner 2: That is fine with me! Shall we begin pulling now?

In this dialogue:
shall is used by the person(s) offering to do something and will is used when
asking someone else fo do something.

Make two sentences of your own with shall and will.

A debate

In a debate there are two groups or sides of people talking on a given topic, for
example, Life in the rural areas is better than life in the city.

One group agrees with the topic; another group disagrees with the topic. Both
sides give their own reasons or opinions.


--- Page 92 ---
You have read the story of Thulani in the rural areas and in the city. In two groups,
do a debate on the topic:

Life in the rural areas is better than life in the city.
Here are some ideas to help you:
transport wild animals ~~ good hospitals fresh air big shops
bright lights ~~ green forests noise from vehicles birds quiet life
clean water dirty water expensive life easy life cheap life
nice people bad people buildings / houses good schools sports



--- Page 93 ---
UNIT

A Thulani in the suburb

Using please and thank you
(i) Listen to the teacher as he asks you to do something.

»
| (ii) In turns, stand up and ask another child to do something for you.
Always remember to say please and thank you.

Read

Thulani in the suburb

suburbs Mrs afternoon hallo through
centre uncle buildings blocks machine
offices lifts hope drove city

Mr Mpofu took Thulani to his house which is in the suburb. A suburb is an area
with people's houses near the city. They drove through the city centre. Thulani
had never seen such tall buildings before. Thulani and Mr Mpofu started talking. &

apa
Ewan
1 ava



--- Page 94 ---
Thulani: What are those tall buildings for, Uncle?

Mr Mpofu: Those are office blocks. People work in the offices in those tall
buildings.

Thulani: Uncle. could you please tell me how the people get to the offices
high up in the tall buildings?

Mr Mpofu: People get to the offices high up there in lifts. A lift is a machine
that carries people up and down in a fall buildings.

At the house Thulani met Mrs Mpofu. Mrs Mpofu started talking to Thulani.

Mrs Mpofu: Hallo Thulanil How are you?
Thulani: Good afternoon, Auntie. | am very well, thank you. How are you, auntie? §

Auntie, could you please give me some water to drink. J
Mrs Mpofu: Oh, just sit here and | will bring some water for you to drink. Here is

the water, Thulani. | hope you will enjoy your stay here.

Thulani: Oh, thank you so much, Auntie. | am sure that | will enjoy my stay

Answer the following questions.
1. What is a suburb?
2. Where did Thulani see the fall buildings?
3. Which statement is true?
A. Thulani had never been inside a tall city building.
B. Thulani had been inside a tall city building before.
4. Which statement is true?
A. Mrs Mpofu was not happy to see Thulani.
B. Mrs Mpofu was very happy fo see Thulani. -

Describing someone's home

Imagine that you were Thulani visiting Mr and Mrs Mpofu’s house for the first time.
In 4 paragraphs, write a composition under the heading: Mr and Mrs Mpofu’s house.
In your composition, write about the following:

Mr and Mrs Mpofu’s House

Paragraph 1: where the house is, its size, surrounded by —, painted in—,
roofed with — the people who live in the house



--- Page 95 ---
Paragraph 2: outside the house: the garden and what's in it, the orchard (if it's
there) and what'sinit, the garage, any outside buildings. the chicken
run (if it's there)

Paragraph 3: inside the house: number of rooms, what's inside the different rooms,
the uses of the different rooms, the toilet and bathroom, what they
use for cooking

Paragraph 4: whether or not you enjoy staying in such a house and why,

Using a or an
Read this aloud:

Sarah visited a vegetable market one day. There she met a kind woman who was
wearing an apron. The kind woman gave Sarah an orange, a banana, an apple,
a mango, an egg and a tomato. Sarah put all these in a basket.

Look at this sentence from the story Thulani in the suburb:
A suburb is an area with people's houses near the City.
It says: a suburb; an area

We use an before a word that starts with the sounds a, e, i, 0 and uv (sounds; not
letters)

For example, an ant, an egg, an insect, an old man, an hour.

We use a before a consonant sound, (Note: sounds; not letters)

For example, a suburb, a dog, a cat, a man, a good boy, a useful tool.

Note: These five letters are the vowels: Aa Ee li Oo Uu
In some words the letter h has a vowel sound: For example, hour, honour,
honest, honourable

Fill in a or an in the blank spaces. Remember the rule above.

1. Father boughtme new bicycle.

2. Thatis — honest girl.

3. They cookon_______ electric stove.

4. Wewenton —___long journey.

5. Footballis — exciting game.

6. We should not leave _____ burning fire behind.

7. Oh, thatis —___ very smart girll

8. Bingme_______empty tin.

9. lam obedient child.

10. Saturday isnot — school day.



--- Page 96 ---
Opposites
Look at these two sentences:
It is frue that February is the shortest month of the year.
It is untrue that February is the hottest month of the year.
Note: the words frue and untrue are opposites. By adding un- to the word true,
the opposite word untrue is formed.
By adding un- to one word in the sentence, change these sentences to mean the
opposite:
1. Some people are very kind to animails.
The boys were able to carry the heavy benches.
River water is suitable for drinking.
The man fastened the belt round his waist.
The two women were very friendly tc each other.
Mother folded the blankets that father bought for us.
Heavy rains are very common in this area.
The new chief has become very popular,
It is safe to walk at night.
10. Your mother is very happy.
11. This weather is very usual at this time of the year.
12. We fried to climb the mountain and we were successful.

VON; AWN

First add un- to make the opposites of the words in the box below. Then write your
own sentences with five of the words:

happy cooked comfortable dress equal fit even married sure wise willing

Do you remember what you have read so far about the boy called Thulani?

Say whether these statements are true or false.

Say it in full sentences like this:
itis tvethot —— — 000000 OOOO OOOOOor
It is false that

Where you say false, say the true statement after that.

1. Thulani grew up in the rural areas.

2. Thulani had never been to a large city.

3. Thulani went to the city by frain.



--- Page 97 ---
Mr Mpofu, Thulani's uncle was a peasant farmer.

Mr Mpofu, Thulani’s uncle lived and worked in the city of Bulawayo.
Thulani was unable to use a cellphone.

Mrs Mpofu was a butcher in the city of Bulawayo.

A suburb is an area with people's houses near the city.

. There are no pedestrians in the city.

10. Thulani travelled to the city during the weekend.

11. Thulani's parents were peasant farmers.

12. Thulani did not like to go to the city.

o® Noa

Using aorthe

Look at this short paragraph:
An hour ago | saw a man in a black car. The man said that the black car was his.
The man was wearing a black suit. He said he had bought the suit from a city
shop. The city shop sold him the suit at a very high price. But he was happy to
pay the price for the black suit.

Note: a is used when you mention a person or thing for the first time
the is used before a noun when that person or thing has diready been
mentioned or is already known.

Say these pairs of sentences in full, filling in: A/a or The/the in the blank

spaces.
1. new leamer joined our class this year. learner is very clever.
2. | have bought new knife. | use knife for cutting sticks.
3. My father has new car. Many people say new car is very fast.
4. Last Sunday was special day to me. It was day | was baptised.
5. There was noise coming from the hall. It was noise of the children
: at a party.
6. 1980 is year to remember. It was year Zimbabwe became
independent.
7. My family lives in village. village is surrounded by beautiful hills.
8. The hen laid dozen eggs. Then dog came and ate all ___
dozen eggs.
9. boat carrying man was sailing across river. The boat sank;
but man was able to swim across river.
10. February is second month of the year. tis only month with less

than thirty days.

——



--- Page 98 ---
Revision and assessment 8

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about the journey he once went on. Then
answer these questions:

When did | fravel?

Where was | going 10?

With whom did | travel?

How did | travel?

Did | enjoy the travel or not? Why do you say so?

pb

In turns, tell the class about a journey that you once went on.

Using first, then, after that and finally

Take turns to read this paragraph to the class:

| had a very important question to ask Mr Zera who lives in the village next to
ours. First, | sent the question through his son, Tatenda. There was no reply. Then, |
texted the question to Mr Zera on his cellphone. There was still no reply. After that,
| rang Mr Zera on his cellphone. He did not take my call. Finally, | went to see Mr
Zera in person.

Using the words first, then, after that and finally, write your own short paragraph
in which you did a number of things: one after another.



--- Page 99 ---
Thulani meets Sifiso and Thabani

later laptop computer learning afterwards quickly spent taught

Later in the day, Thulani met Sifiso and Thabani. Sifiso and Thabani were sister
and brother. They were Mr and Mrs Mpofu’s children. Both Sifiso and Thabani go
fo the same school. The children talked about their schools. They talked about
their teachers. They talked about their friends. They talked about the games
they play with their friends.

Thabani and Sifiso showed Thulani their father’s laptop. A laptop is a small |
computer that you can carry with you. Thulani said, “Please teach me to use
the computer.”

Thabani and Sifiso taught Thulani to use the computer. Thulani quickly learned
10 use the computer. Afterwards, the three children were using the computer
for learning many things. Sifiso and Thabani also showed Thulani how to play the
computer games. Everyday the children spent many hours on the computer

learning or playing games. Thulani really enjoyed using the computer. By the
end of the holidays, Thulani could use the computer on his own. When he
refumed to his home, Thulani told his friends many things about his visit to
Bulawayo.



--- Page 100 ---
Answer these questions.
1. What is a laptop?
2. Do you think the children liked to use the computer? Why?
3. What would you say?
A. Computers are very useful.
B. Computers are useful.
C. Computers are useless.
4. Which statement is true?
A. Thulani liked using the computer.
B. Thulani disliked using the computer.

Using their and there
Read this paragraph aloud:
There was a big meeting at the school. The children came with their parents.
But there was not enough room for all of them in the hall. So the children sat on
their chairs outside. They all sat there with their teachers.

There means in that place or at that place.
There was a big meeting at the school.
Their tells us whose, for example, their parents.

Complete the sentences. Use their and there.
Good children obey parents.

| left her sitting over
Children like to play with
Is some water in the pot?

I was when you came into the classroom.

Many years ago. were no computers.

| know those two girls; names are Janet and Tabeth.
are many fruit trees in the orchard.

school has more learners than ours.

are no families without own rules.

friends.

VEN URN

©



--- Page 101 ---
LN Read and speak

The different sounds of ow

Read aloud the short paragraph below
with the help of your teacher:

We now know that Jane is a slow girl.
She takes a shower very slowly. After
that she puts on her brown gown that
we now all know. Then she lies face-
down in the shadow of the tower with
her elbows on the soft pillow that she
borrows. Sometimes Jane, without any
sorrow, likes to throw herself among the
yellow flowers that grow near her narrow
bedroom window.

The question mark (?)
Tom meets Sekai and they start to talk.
In pairs, pretend that you are Tom and Sekai talking as shown in the pictures:

Do you have any
other name besides
the name Sekai?

Yes, | have another
name besides the
name Sekai.



--- Page 102 ---
My other name | |
is Fiona. Bs oh

What is your other
name?

Look at the beginning and at the end of the words spoken by both Tom and Sekai.
What do you notice?

When and where do we use the signs. and ?
Where do we put the capital letter?

Every question starts with a capital letter and ends with a question mark (?).
On what day do you have sports at school?

Every sentence starts with a capital letter and ends with a full stop.
We have sports at school on Thursdays.

Rewrite these lines putting in capital letters, question marks or full stops:

1.
2.
3.
4.
Ss.
é.

where are you going

the children like the new teacher

did you go to the vegetable market over the weekend
are you sure that you can do it clone

our classroom is very clean

do the learners like the new teacher

a ,
&  wiite
=

Adverbs

Read this paragraph aloud.
The man was talking softly and eating slowly. So | knew that he was not feeling
well. Usually that man talks loudly and eats quickly.



--- Page 103 ---
Answer these questions.
1. How did he know that the man was not feeling well?

Say the words that tell us that the man was not feeling well.
2. How does the man usually talk and eat?

Say the words that tell us how the man usually talks and eats.

Those words that tell us how are known as adverbs
For example, | travelled safely.
safely is an adverb. If tells us how | travelled.

Many adverbs end with -ly; for example, badly, brightly, carefully, nicely, softly
Rewrite every sentence correctly; changing the word in brackets into an adverb:
We do our work (quiet).

The teacher writes (quick).

The men were talking (loud).

She was walking (slow).

We must speak (clear).

| can write (neat).

You must not write (bad).

The moon was shining (bright).

Speak and write A
Hae

Using action words (verbs) with -ing
Sam spent the weekend visiting his friend. Together they did many things: fishing
at the dam, playing with the toys, swimming in the pool, watering the garden,
reading story books, cutting grass in the yard, sweeping the yard, and climbing
the hill nearby.
Answer this question using only one -ing word from the passage above:

How did Sam and his friend spend the weekend?

Answer like this: Sam and his friend spent the weekend fishing at the dam.
(i) In turns, answer this question using -ing in the action words:
How do you spend your free time during the weekend?

Say: During the weekend, | spend my free time

Make use of these action phrases:

NO AWN —

read books wash motor-cars help mother/father

grow frees cut grass in the yard water the garden

clean my pet dog watch television shopping with my parents
sit in the shade play with toys ride my bicycle

take a walk look at the family pictures sleep on my bed

visit friends listen to the music go to church

swim fish cook

(i) Write these sentences in full. Complete them with an -ing action word:

1. At school, what | like most is
2. llast saw him
3. Iheard my father


--- Page 104 ---
What is she .
| remember my friend

| always enjoy

When | arrived, she was
| spend my free time
People must stop

0. Why are you

So®@No Os

Writing a letter.
Imagine that you are Thulani. You have arrived in the city. You are now at Mr and
Mrs Mpofu’s house in the suburb. Write a letter to your parents back home.

Begin by telling them that you travelled safely and that you are now in the big city
of Bulawayo.
Then in your letter, say something about:

-the buildings in the city

-where Uncle Mpofu's house is

-the two children you play with

-where you sleep

-the laptop

-whether you are enjoying your stay in the city.
The body of your letter should be in 3 — 4 paragraphs and 8 — 12 lines. Leave empty
lines between the paragraphs.

Remember that a letter has:
- an address

— a greeting

— an ending.

In the greeting say:

My dear Parents

In the ending, before you write your first name only, say:
Love

(Note that when we write letters to family members, we write our first names only)

Speak and Write =.

More practice using a or the

In the last unit, we learned when to use a or the.

(a) Say this paragraph in full, filling in a or the in empty spaces.
man went on journey riding donkey. man was big,
journey was long. donkey was small and weak. On

and



--- Page 105 ---
way, the man met

woman who was also travelling; carrying
on her back. man on donkey spoke to man on
back of woman. He said to him, "You are very cruel to woman.”
man replied, “You too are very cruel to donkey.”

man

| (b) Write the paragraph above, filling in a or the in the empty spaces. Use capital
letters at the beginning of every sentence.



--- Page 106 ---
A Time to work and time to play

Being polite.
Using: excuse me, may, please, and thank you

(i) Listen carefully as these different children talk to your teacher:

Act 1

First child: Excuse me Sir/Madam. May | please go outside?
Teacher: Oh yes! You may go outside.

First child: Thank you Sir/Madam.

Act 2
Second child: Excuse me Sir/Madam. May | go and sit near the window? | am
feeling very hot.

Teacher: Oh yes! You may go and sit near the window.

Second child: Thank you Sir/Madam.

Act3

Third child: Excuse me Sir/Madam. May | go home now/early? | am not feeling

well.
Teacher: Oh yes! You may go now/early.
Third child: Thank you Sir/Madam.

(i) Using: excuse me, may, please, and thank you
In pairs, pretend that one is the teacher and the other is the child. Take turns to

ask for permission to do something.

Read
The Magaisa family
carpenter repairs furniture television cup-boards
busy hosepipe vegetables toilet wardrobes
watching weekend enjoy bathroom lazy

Mr Magaisa lives in a big city with his wife and three children. He is @ carpenter.

A carpenter makes things from wood. A carpenter also repairs things that are |

made of wood. Mr Magaisa makes furniture. He makes chairs, tables, beds,
cup-boards and wardrobes. Mr Magaisa also puts up roofs on houses. He is a
very busy man.

}



--- Page 107 ---
Mr and Mrs Magaisa have three children. All the three children go to school
on foot. They walk to school with many other children. They work very hard at
school. Mr Magaisa likes children who work hard at school. He likes children
who do their homework well. He does not like children who are lazy or who
fight. In the evenings, the children enjoy watching television.

On weekends the three children get up early. They clean the bathroom and
the toilet. They wash the plates, the cups, the dishes and the pots. Then they
do some work in the garden. The children enjoy watering the vegetables in
the garden with a hosepipe. The vegetables dry up unless they are watered.



--- Page 108 ---
Answer these questions.

What does a carpenter do?

What things are called furniture?

How many children does Mr and Mrs Magaisa have?
How do Mr and Mrs Magaisa’s children go fo school?
What jobs do the children do at home?

How do the children spend the evenings at home?

Do you think Mr Magaisa is a good or a bad father? Why?

Noohkwd =

Using enjoy and enjoyed

| am a baby. |
enjoy sleeping in
my mother’s arms.

| am an old
woman. |
enjoy sitting
by the fire
side.

| am a young girl.
| enjoy cooking
and baking.

| am a young boy.
| enjoy riding my
bicycle up and
down the road.



--- Page 109 ---
In each picture say the action words that come after enjoy.

enjoy, enjoys, enjoyed are always followed by an -ing action word.
| enjoy eating bananas.
James enjoys watching football.
The men enjoyed fishing from a boat.

Tell the class what you enjoy doing.
These are some of the things that different people enjoy doing:

drinking tea or coffee cooking and baking reading story books
o listening to the music watching television sewing and knitting
ot gardening playing with the pet dog /cat visiting friends / places
L fishing playing games like tennis / rugby travelling around the country
" watching football playing games on the computer going to parties

wy Write

=

What do the members of your family enjoy doing?
Write the answers like this:

My mother enjoys

My father enjoys

My sister enjoys

My brother enjoys

My aunt enjoys

My uncle enjoys

| enjoy

NOOO ~

Using pronouns
(i) Say these sentences aloud:
1. John is a good boy. / He is a good boy.
(He takes the place of the name John)
2. Elizabeth is a smart girl. / She is a smart girl.
(She takes the place of the name Elizabeth)
3. Harare is a large city. / It is a large city.
(It takes the place of the name Harare)
4. Animals eat a lot of food. / They eat a lot of food.
(They takes the place of the name Animals)
5. John and | are brothers. We look alike.
(We takes the place of the names John and I)
We use these small words so that we do not always repeat the nouns or names.
These small words are called pronouns.
A pronoun takes the place of a noun or a name.
These are some pronouns we often use: he, she, it, they, we,



--- Page 110 ---
(i) Using pronouns
Write these pairs of sentences, replacing the underlined words with the right
pronoun.
1. Our head teacher is Mr Moyo. Mr Moyo is very kind.
Our farmers grow many crops. Our farmers also keep many animals.
| love my mother. My mother loves me too.
Joseph and Jane have come. Joseph and Jane are in the garden.
My dog has puppies. My dog has five puppies.
Monday is a school day. Monday is the first school day of the week.
Patricia and | are friends. Patricia and | play many games together.

2.
3.
4,
5.
6.
7.

Using unless, join the first part of the sentence in the box on the left with a suitable

ending from the box on the right.
1. The rivers will dry up
2. Nobody willhelpyou YOU run very fast.
3. Soon there will be no wild animals
4. You cannot win the race unless
5. You cannot climb up the roof people stop killing animals.
6. Soon there will be no forests left___
7. The teacher will not be happy
- You will miss the early morning bus___

|

Helping verbs: is am are does has have can
Read this passage aloud:

How things change with time!



--- Page 111 ---
Our family now has a car. Two years ago we had no car. Both father and mother
now have driver's licences and can drive. Two years ago both had no licences
and could not drive. Nowadays mother does most of her laundry using a machine.
In the past she did all her laundry by hand. How things change with time!

The words in bold are all helping verbs.
Complete the table below to match the verbs in the paragraphs above.

Using helping verbs, write two paragraphs of your own. The heading should be
How things change with time!

1st paragraph
Write about yourself, your brother or sister and your friend.

2nd paragraph
Write about your family, your father, mother and any relatives for example, your
aunt, uncle and niece.



--- Page 112 ---
Revision and assessment 9

Listen

Listen carefully and repeat these lines as your teacher says them, one by one:

« The bride and the bridegroom were very happy at their wedding.

« The bride was an angel in her long, beautiful, white gown.

+ The bridegroom was dressed in a light blue suit, a white shirt and a matching
fie.

« The wedding itself took place in the chapel next to the public swimming pool.

« There were lots of eats as well as drinks for everyone who came to the wedding.

Say three things that you enjoy doing.
For example, | enjoy walking in the moonlight.

LN Read

Read this short paragraph to the class:

Weekend specials

Every weekend is special fo me. Most weekends | enjoy watching television when
| am not busy. Sometimes | spend the weekend visiting my friends or playing with
them when they visit me. When the weather is fine we go out fishing or swimming
together. Homework is not the best thing | enjoy doing during the weekend.

Re-write the following sentences with the correct form and spelling of the verbs in
brackets.

1. Yesterday it (rain) heavily.

In the past, people (walk) long distances.

Last week a helicopter (fly) over our school.

| washed the plates and (put) them in the kitchen.

Yesterday | was late for school and (miss) the first lesson.

When | was still young | (sleep) with my parents.

Last night, the baby (cry) alot.

Last season most farmers (grow) wheat.

ONDA WN



--- Page 113 ---
A family outin

A family outing
Saturday holidays family outing journey
travelled ruins afternoon enjoyment museum
lunar park picture riding wheel
important jets leaders king walls

On Saturday afternoon, Mr Magaisa’s family goes for an outing. An outing

is a journey you take for enjoyment. In the last outing Mr Magaisa took his

family to the museum. A museum is a place where important things are kept

for people to see. In the museum they saw a big picture of King Lobengula.
Lobengula was the great king of the Ndebele people. They also saw big |
pictures of Mbuya Nehanda and Sekuru Kaguvi. Mbuya Nehanda and Sekuru |
Kaguvi were great leaders of the Shona people. |

Later that day, Mr Magaisa tock the children to the lunar park. The lunar park
is a place for fun for the children. The children enjoyed riding the fast jets at
the lunar park. They also enjoyed riding the big wheel.

During the school holidays the Magaisa family went on a long journey by
car. They travelled to the Great Zimbabwe Ruins near the city of Masvingo.



--- Page 114 ---
The Great Zimbabwe Ruins are a famous place of interest. People visit places
of interest to see, enjoy themselves and learn many things. There they saw

the great stone walls of the ruins. The family enjoyed the trip to the Great
Zimbabwe ruins.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
1. What is an outing?

2. What is a museum?

3. Who was Lobengula?

4. Who were Mbuya Nehanda and Sekuru Kaguvi?

5. What is a lunar park?

6. Where did the Magaisa family travel to during the holidays?

Using when

Read these pairs of sentences aloud:
(i) When | was in Grade One, my teacher was Miss Dube.
~My teacher was Miss Dube when | was in Grade One.

(i) We go into our classrooms when the bell rings.
When the bell rings, we go into our classrooms.

(iii) There was thunder and lightning when it was raining.
When it was raining, there was thunder and lightning.



--- Page 115 ---
Here, when is used to show that at the same time as something else, or just after.
Join the first part of the sentence in the column on the left with a suitable part from
the column on the right.

. When the teacher walks into the classroom | —_the schools close.
. I shall work in the garden — we go info our classrooms.
. When my father gets some money — we stand up and greet her.

. We go on holiday when — they are flooded.
. When the bell rings —when | get home after school.
. We must not cross the streams when —he buys new clothes for me.

Listen and read nd,

Another sound of u
Listen to your teacher as he/she says this sentence from the story:

Mr Magaisa took his family to the museum. The word museum says: ‘miuziem’

(i) Now read this short story.
The underlined u has the same sound as the underlined yu in museum.

The refugees and their mules

Five refugees ran away from the war in their country. There was no future for
them in their own country. Dressed in brown suits the five refugees fled to another
country riding on their mules.

The five refugees were riding their mules in single file down the avenue and saluting
to the people. The mules were thin and seemed to walk with acute pain in their
legs.



--- Page 116 ---
Many people thought they were fugitives running away from prison. The people
were not amused. There was no excuse for these men in brown suits to ride the
thin mules. The people became furious and accused the five men of abusing the
mules. They shouted at the five refugees to get off the mules but the men refused.
The men argued that they were not abusing the mules and that the mules were
theirs.

(i) Places of interest.
Look at these sentences from the story A family outing.
The Great Zimbabwe Ruins are a famous place of interest.
People visit places of interest to see, enjoy themselves and learn many things.
(i) Tell the class what you know about any of the places of interest in Zimbabwe
listed below. Your teacher will show you pictures and tell you more about these
places of interest in Zimbabwe:

Great Zimbabwe Ruins
Heroes’ Acre

Victoria Falls

Hwange National Park
Mana Pools

Eastern Highlands
Gonarezhou Game Park
Matopo Hills

Chinhoyi Caves

Kariba Dam

Write: Extra mile

Writing proper names with two or more words.

Look at the list of the places of interest. The name of each place is made up of two
or more words, for example, Great Zimbabwe Ruins. Each one of the words in the
name starts with a capital letter.

Rewrite these sentences with capital letters for the proper names of people, places
and things:

1. the town of beitbridge is on the border with south africa.
2. my aunt, mrs janet mpofu is a nurse at mpilo hospital.



--- Page 117 ---
3. leona tembo lives at rufaro mission.

4. my cousin, miss anne goto teaches at riverton primary school.
5. the head teacher of hippo valley high school is mr p. sibanda.
6. our family visited the victoria falls on new year's day.

7. the matopo hills are south of bulawayo.

8. iwant to go to hwange national park.

9. there are many animals in the gonarezhou game park.

10. we are going to the chinhoyi caves next week.

More practice using helping verbs in the past tense.

In Unit 20, we learned about the helping verbs.

Re-write the following sentences using the helping verbs correctly. Start each
sentence with the beginning given in brackets:

1. 1am not feeling well. (Yesterday —

2. | can notride a bicycle. (Threeyearsago — |)

3. That boy has no friend here. (lastyear

4. My sister does not like pets. (Whenshewasyoung |)
5. My brother is in Zambia. (Twoweeksago — |

6. There are many wild animals. (Alongtimeago —

7. Most towns have no street lights. (Before independence, — |)

An outing
At the beginning of this unit, we read about Mr Magaisa taking his family for an
outing.
(a) Which is the right ending to complete the sentence below?
A. Anoutingis
A. along journey to do some work there.
B. a very dangerous journey.
C. ashort journey that you take for enjoyment.
D. ajourney that has a very sad ending.
(bo) Nowadays, many families go on outings.
They go to: the dam, the mountain, the river, the forest, the city centre, the
market, the game park, the bridge, the waterfalls, the hilltop, the radio station,
a place of interest, and so on.
Imagine that your own family went on an outing.Tell the class about that outing.
Say:
- when you went on that outing
- who went with you
- where you went
- how you travelled


--- Page 118 ---
- what you saw or did
- whether or not you enjoyed the outing.

Imagine that you travelled to one of the places of interest in Zimbabwe. Write a
letter to a friend telling him/her about that outing.

Set out your letter like this:
Your address
the date
Dear (name of your friend)

1st paragraph: when and where you travelled to; how you tavelled:;
with who?

2nd paragraph: what you saw; what you enjoyed most or did; what you
thought before this outing; what you learned;

3rd paragraph: any other things that interested you or that you enjoyed
on this outing

How are you? | am very well. Pass my greetingsto —_, and —__.
Love

(your names)



--- Page 119 ---
A Good friends

J —

UNIT

Talking about our own school days
(i) Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about his/her primary school days.

Answer the following questions about your own school days:

(i) — What year did you start school and where?
— Who were some of your teachers so far?
— So far what have you learned at school?

Good friends

secondary primary day-scholars evening
important news although smart
stout lonely always

Richard and Thembi are brother and sister, although they don’t look alike.
Richard is tall and thin. Tnembi is short and stout. Richard goes fo a secondary
school. Thembi goes to a primary school.

Both children are day-scholars. Day-scholars go to school and return home §
everyday. Richard and Thembi meet at home every evening. They like to tell @
each other news about their schools. They also tell each other about their
friends at school.

Richard has a friend called Ben. Ben is a tall boy who is always smart. Thembi
also has a friend called Tanaka. Tanaka and Thembi look alike.


--- Page 120 ---
Their mother says it is important to have good friends. She says that friends help
each other. Friends play and learn together. Friends talk good things with each
other. Without friends people are lonely and unhappy.

Answer these questions.

Who are Richard and Thembi?

Do Richard and Thembi go to the same school?

Who is Richard's friend?

Who is Thembi's friend?

When are children called day-scholars?

If Tanaka looks like Thembi, then Tanakais also — and

och WON =

The sound ou as in stout
Say this sentence correctly after your teacher:

Thembi is short and stout.
The ou in stout says ‘aw’



--- Page 121 ---
(i) Say this poem after your teacher:

When | shout aloud

| stand oulside on the ground around
my house

Facing the mountain with clouds

to the south of my house.

| open my mouth and shout or

sing aloud.

Then t hear sounds coming from the
mountain with the clouds.

They say it’s the sounds of my

loud voice,

But | doubt if there are no thousands
of people in the clouds;
Surrounding the mountain to

the south of my house.

Writing a paragraph
Sometimes we write a paragraph to answer one question.
For example, Is it important to have friends?
First look at the story Good friends, then answer the question above by completing
the following paragraph:

Good friends

| have a good friend called ________. We have been good friends for
years. Itis to have good friends. Friends —_____ each other. Friends
— and —___ together. Friends also — good things with each
other. Without friends, peopleare —___ and

Opposites
Look at these sentences from the story Good friends:
Richard and Thembi don't look alike.
Richard is tall and thin.
Thembi is short and stout.
We can rewrite the sentences like this:
Richard and Thembi don’t look alike.
Richard is tall, Thembi is short. (tall is the opposite of short)
Richard is thin, Thembi is stout. (thin is the opposite of stout)



--- Page 122 ---
Rewrite the following sentences to mean the opposite by replacing the word in
brackets with one of the words from the box:

cold dirty slow easy absent forget wide young

The question she asked me was (difficult).

There is a (narrow) bridge across the river.

It was very (hot) yesterday.

My father looks very (old).

The shirt he was wearing was (clean).

Thembi was (present) when the school lessons started.

| sometimes (remember) the names of some of the learners in our class.
The car was (fast) as it drove past the school.

ONAL

The sound of -y

Say these sentences from the story Good friends:

Richard goes to a secondary school.

Thembi goes to a primary school.

The -y af the end of the word secondary and primary sounds like the short -i

r=

= Write: Extra mile

Using although

Say these sentences aloud:
Richard and Thembi are brother and sister although they do not look alike.
My father looks like a young man although he is now very old.
The teacher loves me very much although | am sometimes late for school.
We went outside to play although the weather was very cold.

Note: we use although when we say something that makes the main statement

surprising or less true.

Complete the following statements using although:

1. Mary and | have the same surname although

Our football team played very well although

| went to school on Monday although

When | grow up. | like to be a farmer although

Tapiwa is my friend although —

The teachers are friendly to all the learners although some

James looked happy although

NO OA WN



--- Page 123 ---
A game to play in pairs
Asking and answering questions using helping verbs:
is are was were do does did can will.

Imagine that your class will have a new teacher. You got a chance to speak to
the new teacher on the phone. In pairs, one pretends to be the teacher asking
questions and the other is the learner.

Answer in full, correct sentences:
Is your home far from, or near the school? Are you a boy or a gif? Do you
have many friends at school? Can you swim? Were you at this school from
Grade One? Was there a time when you did not want to go to school? Did
you sometimes come late to school? Dees your father know me? Will you
always be obedient?



--- Page 124 ---
Revision and assessment 10

Listen

Listen and say the lines of this short poem after your teacher:

Good, better, best!
Never rest until:
The good is better,
vl he fpr is Bt

1. Say alone to the class the short poem in Listen above.
2. Say in pairs the short poem in Listen above to the class.

>

Rd, Read

Read this passage aloud:

Do you go to church? Which church do you go to? In many countries today,
there are different churches. The people who go to these different churches wear
different dresses. Some dresses are green, white, pink, blue or even red.

Write one full sentence with each of the words below. Your sentence should show
that you know how to use the words properly.
because unless although until since when after before



--- Page 125 ---
. Taking part in sports at school

UNIT Jaen em ch hi

Read

Taking part in sports at school

sports talking weekly Wednesday jump
always cheat right honest compete
fairly losing glad tomorrow everyone
listening busy homework

GE
Salk Bb

One evening, Richard and Thembi were talking about sports at their schools.

Richard: Yesterday was sports day at our school. Wednesday is our sports
day, weekly.

Thembi: Do you take part in sports at your school?
Richard: Oh yes, | do! | run and | jump.
Thembi: Do you always win?



--- Page 126 ---
Richard: Sometimes | win, sometimes | don't. But winning is not the most
important thing in sports. Some people even cheat in order to win in
sports. That is not right. We must always be honest and compete
fairly. The most important thing in sports is taking part.

Thembi: Oh yes! our teacher says that we must always be honest. Even
when we are losing at sport, we must be honest.

Richard: | am glad that your teacher says that. But Thembi, | must now do

my homework. vee
Thembi: | too have some homework to do. | have some pages to read. | J

Tomorrow | will tell the class what | have read about. Everyone will

be listening to me. They will all clap hands for me if | do well.

Richard: Okay, Thembil! Let's get busy with our homework!

The statements below are about what you have read in Taking part in sports at
school.

Rewrite the statements beginning like this:

ltistrvethat or
It is untrue that

1. Richard was an honest boy.

Winning is the most important thing in sports.
Richard always wins at sports.

Taking part in sports is more important than winning.
Football is a game played by boys only, not by girls.
In sports, it is good to be honest even when losing.
Thembi liked to do her homework.

Cheating is not allowed in sports.

ONO PAWN

Look at this sentence from Taking part in sports at school:
Wednesday is our school sports day weekly.

Weekly means every week.

What do you think the words in the box mean?

daily hourly weekly monthly yearly (or) annually



--- Page 127 ---
Rewrite the following sentences replacing the underlined phrases with the words in
the box from the previous page.

We go to school everyday from Monday to Friday.

An aeroplane lands at the air-port every hour.

The workers are paid once every month.

| celebrate my birthday once every year.

One must wash oneself everyday.

My friend visits me every month.

| go to church every week.

A bus comes to pick passengers from this station every hour.

ONO AWN —

Using if
(i) Look at this sentence from Taking part in sports at school.
They will all clap hands for me if | do well.
In turns, answer these questions in full, correct sentences using if:
1. What will you do if you get a lot of money?
Say: If | get alot of money | will
2. What will you do if you see a snake?
Say: If| | see a snake, |
3. What happens if the rains come?
Say: Iftherainscome —
4. What do you do if you get sick?
Say: Iflgetsick, | —

We use if for saying what would happen when something else happens or does
not happen.

Join the first part of the sentence in the box on the left with the suitable part in the
box on the right.

We will go to the market on foot you have no bus-fare.

We cannot make some tea there is no water left in the kettle.
You will not get on the bus there is no moonlight.

It will be very dark tonight if | the heavy rains go on like this.
The teacher will be angry with us there is no bus coming to pick us.
All the rivers and dams will fill up we don't do our homework well.



--- Page 128 ---
Using the question mark (?)

Asking questions using helping verbs:

is are was were do does did can will.

Look at the questions the new teacher asked using helping verbs.

starting with a helping verb, ask the right question for each of these answers:
His name is Freddy.

2. We are going by train.

3. You have got a problem.

4

5

—
.

_ She has got a friend called Maria.
He does not remember where he put the money.

Go back to the end of Unit 22.
What is at the end of every question asked by the new teacher?
Note: Always put a question mark at the end of every question that you write.

Starting every question witha helping verb, write the right questions forthe questions
below.

1. The workers did not complete the job given to them.

2. Joram can swim across the dam.

3. Jona will be able to play in the football team.

4. The teacher was pleased with your home-work.

5. These boys do not play sports at school.

Using 's to show whose if is, look at these two sentences:
Mr Moyo is the father of Thoko./ Mr Moyo is Thoko's father.
These Two sentences mean the same thing.
Which sentence (the first or the second) do you think is the better way of speaking?
Say these sentences ina different way using ’s
1. The name of our teacher is Mrs Sithole.
2. The name of our country is Zimbabwe.
3. | heard the mother of Sipho talking.
4. The tail of my dog is long.
5. We did the work in the time of a day.
6. Farming is the job of my father.
7. The home of my friend is near the school.
8. My friend is the son of the headmaster.
9. The house of my aunt is big.
10. Yesterday was the birthday of Dumisani.



--- Page 129 ---
Using 's for example, mother's shoes, the boy's name, Chipo's friend.
Using 's, write five correct sentences of your own.
For example, | polished my father's shoes.

A good letter has:

the address , the date, the greeting, the body of the letter in good paragraphs,
and the ending.

In 3 — 4 paragraphs, write a letter to your friend at another school.

Tell your friend about sports at your school.

The body of your letter should be 8 — 12 lines in length.

You may use the following questions to help you.

Paragraph 1 Do you like sports very much?
Which day is sports day at your school?
Who is your Sports Master?
Is your Sports Master good? Why?

Paragraph 2 Do the learners in your school do many sports?
What sporting activities do some learners do? (name three)
What do you do/play yourself?

Paragraph 3 For which sport(s) is your school famous?
Who is the best athlete at your school?
Which sport does he/she do/play?



--- Page 130 ---
Doing homework

=

LL Read and Listen
Take turns to read this poem aloud.

Why | didn't do my homework

| fried to do my homework,

But there were cartoons to watch on television:

And a friend was texting me on my cell phone,
So | could nat do my homewatk.

| tied to do my homework,

But my friend was calling me outside;

To play the many games that we

always play together,

So | could not do my homework.

| fried to do my homework,

But mother said it was time to go to bed:
And she switched off all the lights,

So | could not do my homework.

E will try to explain to my teacher,

Why | did not do my homework;

And hope that my teacher understands,
That it was not my fault.



--- Page 131 ---
Using because, answer these questions from the poem above:
Say it like this: He did not do his homework because

1. Why did he not do his homework in the first place?

2. Why did he not do his homework in the second place?

3. Why did he not do his homework in the third place?

Speak: Extra mile

In groups of four recite the poem Why | didn’t do my homework with each one
doing one stanza.

Opposites using dis-
Look at this sentence from the passage Homework is fun to mel
Some children dislike homework. Dislike is the opposite of like.
Rule: the opposite of some words is formed by adding dis- at the beginning of the
word.
Rewrite these sentences to mean the opposite by adding dis- to the words in bold:
The star appeared in the clouds.
The two boys always agree.
This bed has a lot of comfort.
The water has been connected.
After the rains, the game continued.
Do you ever obey your parents?
There is order in the bedroom.
The goal he scored was allowed by the referee.
Farming has its advantages.

VRNoO AWN ~

Answer these questions.

1. What is homework?

2. (a) Do you think that homework is useful?
(b) Why do you think so?

3. Why do some children dislike homework?

4. What is a hobby?

5. Give two examples of hobbies for children.


--- Page 132 ---
Using instead of
Say this sentence from the passage about homework:

They want the children to help at home instead of doing homework.

| like to watch football instead of rugby.

You are late, and should be running instead of walking. |

We planted fruit frees instead of flowers in the yard.
We use instead of to show that one thing replaces another. ;
Using instead of join the part of the sentence in the box on the left with the f
suitable ending from the box on the right.

. We should grow more trees

. I stayed at home reading books
. He spent all his money on clothes
. He goes to church on foot

. He likes to wear short trousers

buying food for his children
making noise and playing.
going out fishing.

instead of|long trousers.
of cutting them down.

. You should be quiet and work hard driving his car.

Using next to
Read this sentence from the passage on homework:
| always enjoy sitting next to one of them as they help me with my homework.
1. In turns, tell the class who sits next to you.
Sayitlike this; — (name of the child) sits next to me. (or)
I'sitnextto — (name of child).

2. In turns, tell the class what is next to these places:

Say it like this: The (name) is next to the (name).
the boys' toilet the girls’ toilet the rubbish pit
the garden the playground the school office
the school your home the clinic
the market the borehole the church

the shop/store the dam



--- Page 133 ---
Using some
Some children dislike doing homework.
In this sentence some means not all.

Complete the sentences below.
Some teachers

Some farmers

Some parents

Some boys

Some schools

Some motor-cars

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

More pronouns

Read these three sentences:

1. A hobby is what you enjoy doing when you are free.
(people) (people)

2. They say homework takes away their play-time.
(The children) (the children’s)

3. They say the children ask them for help to do homework.
(The parents ) (the parents)

All the words in bold are pronouns; they take the place of names or nouns.

You can see the nouns. They replace written in small letters at the bottom of each
line.

Other pronouns are: he, she, it, they, them, his, her.

Stories become boring if the nouns are repeated. So, instead of repeating the
nouns, we use pronouns.

Rewrite the following passage, replacing the nouns in brackets with the right pronouns.
Keep the paragraphs as they are.

My parents

My parents are lovely people. (My parents) are both in their early thirties. My father
is thirty-three years old. (My father) is the older of the two. My mother is thirty-one
years old. My father and mother love one another very much. (My father and
mother) spend lots of fime together.



--- Page 134 ---
My father and mother are working. (My father and mother) are both teachers.
(My father and mother) teach at different schools. Mother teaches at one school.
The school is in town. (The school) is a very big school. (Mother) is the senior teacher
there. Father teaches at another school. (My father) is the Mathematics teacher
there. The school is on the farm. (The school) is a small school.

My father likes to wear his brown hat. (My father’s) favourite colour is khaki. My
mother likes to camry her handbag wherever (my mother) goes. The handbag
was given to (my mother) by my sister. My sister bought (the handbag) at a flea
market.

| love my parents very much. (My parents) are very good to me. | am always
obedient to (my father and mother).



--- Page 135 ---
Revision and assessment 11

| Listen

Repeat these sentences after your teacher:

| love my friend with all my heart.

School starts with morning assembly.

My arm is painful.

| go to the market once every week.

The buses to town depart from this station.
The city of London is very far from here.
He was pushing a cart full of bags.

Our family lives on a big farm.

In pairs talk about one of the following while the class listens:
e sports at school

home-work

morning assembly at school

the independence day in Zimbabwe

the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe.

od, Read

Read this poem to the class:
God, | wonder
Why some people are white and others black.
Why some people are rich and others poor.
Why some people are clever and others foolish.
Why you make some people happy and others sad.
And yet:
We all have the same red blood.

Write a short poem of your own in which you are talking about something that:
(a) is surprising to you

(b) is very pleasing to you

(c) makes you or made you very sad.



--- Page 136 ---
A Homework is fun to me!

UNIT

Homework is fun to me!

chance activities example school-girl exercise
through improve dislike composition hobby
hobbies watching against instead forces

As a young school-girl, | always
enjoy doing my homework.
Homework is my chance to learn
from my parents, brother or sister
when return home. | always enjoy
sitting next to one of them as they
help me with my homework.

Homework is a set of learning
activities to be done outside the
class. Reading some given pages
>is an example of homework.
; Writing a composition or an
exercise is another example of
homework. Homework gives me
more time for learning. Through
doing homework | improve my
learning skills and abilities.

Some leamers dislike homework. They say homework takes away their
play-time. They say after school it is time for hobbies, not for homework. A
hobby is what you enjoy doing when you are free. Some of the children’s
hobbies are fishing, watching television, or playing with their toys.

There are some parents too who are against homework. They want the
children to help at home, instead of doing homework. They also say that
the children ask them for help to do the homework. This forces them to
stop doing their own work.



--- Page 137 ---
f Answer these questions.

1. What is homework?

| 2. (a) Do you think that homework is useful?
(b) Why do you think so?

3. Why do some children dislike homework?

4. What is a hobby?

5.

Give two examples of hobbies for children.

Choose the correct answers.

1. The person who wrote this passageisa— |
A. teacher B. mother C. father D. school-girl.
2. This passage showsthat —
A. all the parents are against homework. |
B. not all the parents are against homework.
C. all the parents like homework for their children. |
D. all the children dislike homework.
3. The person who wrote thispassage — | |
A. likes doing homework.
B. dislikes doing homework.
C. has many hobbies. |
D. has no hobbies.
4, What would you say? |
J A. Homework is a waste of time.
: B. Children should not do any homework.
C. Homework is useful.
D. Children cannot lean without homework.

5) Listen and read Jd,

The sound of ir, ur and or

Say this sentence from the passage Homework is fun to me!

1. As a young school-girl | always enjoy doing my homework.
In the word girl the -ir- sounds like e: and the r is silent

2. Homework is my chance to learn from my parents when | return home.
In the word return the -ur- sounds like e: and the r is silent.

3. Homework is my chance to learn from my parents.
In the word work the or- sounds like e: and the r is silent.



--- Page 138 ---
(i) Read the following paragraphs aloud:

Thursday, the third of May was the birthday of
my eldest brother. He turned thirty on that day.
My brother is a nurse. He works at the clinic near
the church. A church is a place of worshipping.

On his birthday, my brother received an urgent
call from his work-place. There was a thirfeen-
year old girl with burns. Burns hurt a lot, so my
brother rushed to the clinic to help the girl. The
girl had burnt her hand with a candle that she
= was using while doing homework. Luckily, the
. girl's burns were not the worst that my brother
: had seen in his work as a nurse.

Spelling and dictation
Your teacher will call out some words, and a paragraph from Homework is fun to
me! while you write them.

Writing paragraphs
Read again the story Homework is fun to me!
Under the heading Homework write a paragraph by answering these questions in full:

Homework

What is homework? Do you enjoy doing homework? Are there some children who
do not like doing homework? What do they want to do instead of homework? Why
is homework important to you? Who sometimes helps you to do your homework?
When do you usually do your homework? Do you sometimes fail to do your
homework? When do you sometimes fail to do your homework? What do you
advise other children to do?



--- Page 139 ---
Using should

Read this short paragraph aloud:

All children should go to school. They should not be late for school. At school,
learners should work hard. They should play with good friends. At home the leamers
should obey their parents. They should also help their parents.

Note: in this paragraph should is used before saying the right thing to do.
Using should, answer these questions in full, correct sentences:
1. At what age should a child start Grade One?

Should people cross flooded rivers?

Should people cut down trees?

Should people burn grass?

Should people throw rubbish everywhere?

Should learners come late to school?

Should girls be forced to marry when they are still young?

What should one do after using the toilet?

Where should you go when you are sick?
. What should you do when your friend needs help?
. What should you do before you go info a room where there is someone?
12. Should people drink water from the rivers?

— = 0 ONO AWN

Using should write two sentences about what learners:
(a) should do
(b) should not do.

Say the sentences you have written using should to the class.



--- Page 140 ---
A End of term 2 revision and assessment

Paper 1

Time: 2 hours

Read
tortoise cheering laughed learned boasting
gathered stream decided shade asleep
crossed reached finishing watching against

race
Read the passage and answer the questions that follow.

Hare and Tortoise

Hare always boasted about how fast he could run. He said that he was the
fastest animal in the forest. One day Tortoise said he wanted to race against |
Hare. Hare said, “Tortoise, you are the slowest animal in the forest.” But Tortoise |
said that he wanted fo race.

PrrSE——


--- Page 141 ---
So the animals gathered fo watch the race. The race started with Hare far
ahead of Tortoise. Hare ran down the road and round the hill. When Hare looked §
back, Tortoise was far, far behind.

So Hare decided to rest in the shade of a big tree. In that cool shade, Hare fell
asleep. Hare did not hear Tortoise walking past him.

The animals saw Tortoise crossing the finishing line. He had won the race! The
animals cheered Tortoise noisily. This awoke Hare back at the stream. He got up
and started running again. When he got to the finishing line Tortoise was already
there. From that day Hare had learned his lesson. He never boasted again.

In numbers 1-6 choose the answers from the story Hare and Tortoise.

1. Which animals were in the race?

A. elephants B. lions and elephants
C. hare and tortoise D. only Tortoise
2. Inthe race, Tortoise passed Hare when Hare was
A. laughing B. running fast
C. still boasting D. fast asleep
3. Which word in the story means the opposite of fastest?
A. against B. slowest
C. resting D. cheering

4. What awoke Hare from his sleep?

A. the cheering noise B. the walking tortoise
C. the cool shade D. the finishing line
5. Tortoise won this race because .
A. Hare was boasting B. Tortoise was not boasting

C. the animals cheered Tortoise  D. Hare slept during the race
6. What lesson did Hare learn by the end of the race?

A. that tortoises run faster than hares  B. how fo cross the streams

C. not to boast D. that he had no friends
In numbers 7-12 choose the correct verbs to complete the sentences.
7. lalwaysenjoy television in the evenings.

A. watch B. watches C. watched D. watching
8. I tea every morning before | go to school.

A. drink B. drinks C. drank D. drinking
9. Mysisterisasmart girl; she her teeth daily.

A. brush B. brushes C. brushed D. brushing



--- Page 142 ---
10.He to live in town long back and never came back.

A. go B. goes C. went D. going
11. The Tongawere — in the area now under water.
A. lived B. living C. live D. lives
12. The areais by forests with animals.
A. surrounded B. surrounds C. surrounding D. surround
In number 13 in which word has the vu a different sound from the rest?
13. A. ambush B. summer C. hundred D. jug
In number 14 in which word does the ea have a different sound from the the rest?
14. A. bread B. thread C. meat D. threat
In number 15 which word does not have the same sound as the rest? !
15. A. height B. light C. heat D. white h

In number 16 choose the right word to fill in the blank space.

16. Alion is animal that is fierce.
A. a B. an C. which D. what
In numbers 17 — 19 choose the right word to complete the sentence.
17. You will not wintherace —— you run fast.
A. if B. after C. unless D. but
18. In our family we always pray — going to bed.
A. because B. during C. before D. although
19. Maria walked into the house, greeted everyone sat down.
A. and B. but C. when D. because
in numbers 20 -25 choose the right preposition to complete the sentence.
20. Every moming I go foschool — foot.
A. by B. on C. with D. to
21. Nowadays most people travel overseas — air.
A. in B. on C. with D. by
22. The sun sefs the west.
A. at B. in C. to D. on
23. | shared the sweets John and Peter.
A. for B. among C. to D. between
24. She was speaking — English all the time.
A. by B. in C. with D. to
25. In the evenings, many people sit outside and look the moon.
A. at B. on C. fo D. after

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow:

Built on the Zambezi River on Zimbabwe's northern border with Zambia, down-stiream
from the Victoria Falls is Lake Kariba. Lake Kariba used fo be the biggest man-made
dam in the whole of Africa.

Before the dam was built, the Tonga people were living in the area now under
water. The Tonga were moved to higher ground to make way for the dam. Unlike



--- Page 143 ---
other big dams in Zimbabwe that are built for irrigation, the water of Lake Kariba
turns the wheels that make electricity. This is the electricity that is used in many
cities, factories, and people's houses in Zimbabwe and Zambia.

Lake Kariba is surrounded by forests with animals like elephants, lions, buffalo,
zebra, hippo, crocodiles and many others. Many people visit the area around the
lake to see these animals. People also go to the lake for fishing. There are many
islands on the lake where people can set up camps and enjoy themselves.

In numbers 26 - 33 choose the answer from the passage above.
26. Lake Kariba is a man-made dam. This means it

A. was built on the Zambezi river

B. is one of the biggest dams in Africa

C. was built by men

D. forced the Tonga to move to higher ground
27. Where is Lake Kariba?

A. in north-eastern Zambia.

B. up-stream from the Victoria Falls.

C. to the south of the Zambezi River.

D. on the Zambezi River, down-stream from the Victoria Falls.
28. Which statement is correct?

A. Lake Kariba is still the largest man-made dam in Africa.

B. The Tonga people are able to live on the land that is under-water.



--- Page 144 ---
C. Lake Kariba was once the largest man-made dam in Africa.
D. The Victoria Falls are down-sfream from Lake Kariba.
29. Why were the Tonga people moved to higher ground?
A. To make way for the dam.
B. Because many visitors wanted to see the wild animals.
C. The Tonga people were living on the islands on the lake.
D. They were too many in one small place.
30. From the passage above, what do you think an island is?
A. avery large dam
B. a piece of land surrounded by water
C. the wheel that turns, making electricity
D. an area where people can set up camp and enjoy themselves 14
31. The passage says that the water from Lake Kariba is mainly used for :
A. fishing
B. the wild animals to drink
C. turning the wheels that make electricity
D. irrigation
32. The passage also says that —
A. Lake Kariba is the only big dam ever built in Zimbabwe
B. all the electricity from Lake Kariba is used only in Zimbabwe
C. very few people like fo visit Lake Kariba and the area around it
D. there are other big dams in Zimbabwe.
33. From the passage, which statement below is right?
A. It was a waste of money to build Lake Kariba.
B. Lake Kariba is very important to the people of Zimbabwe and Zambia.
C. People visit the area around Lake Kariba to hunt and Kill wild animals.
D. Without Lake Kariba, the Tonga would not be able to grow their crops.

In numbers 34 - 35, choose the right adverb.
34. The teacher wants everyone to write

A. kindly B. softly C. neatly D. early
35. We celebrate Christmas ——
A. hourly B. annually C. weekly D. monthly
In numbers 36 - 37, choose the right adjective.
346. Motherusesa_——_ knife to cut the meat into small pieces.
A. fall B. difficult C. sharp D. fat
37. Lions, elephants, zebras and hipposare all — animals.
A. deep B. dry C. tame D. wild

In numbers 38 - 39, choose the word opposite in meaning to the underlined word.
38. There is a narrow bridge across the river.

A. wide B. small C. big D. high
39. When my name was called, | was awake.
A. happy B. present C. asleep D. absent



--- Page 145 ---
In number 40, choose the right phrase to complete the sentence.
40. She was collecting firewood — make a fire.
A. instead of B. in order to C. next to D. because of

In number 41, which is the polite way to ask someone for a pen to use for a short while?
41. A. Give me your pen for a short while.

B. Please lend me your pen for a short while.

C. | want to use your pen for a short while.

D. Do you have a pen that | can use for a short while?

In numbers 42-43, choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

42.A sells meatin a shop.

A. vendor B. farmer C. butcher D. peasant
43. My mother’s brotherismy —

A. aunt B. uncle C. nephew D. grandfather

In numbers 44 - 44, choose the right pronoun to complete the sentence.
44. | came here with my friends, but now | have lost

A. they B. their C. them D. these
45. That is my mother’s shop; itis — alone.
A. she B. her C. hers D. his
46. My brotherand —___ go to the same school.
A. B. mine C. me D. him
In numbers 47 —- 48, choose the right word for the sound the animal makes.
47. Adog — |
A. barks B. shouts C. trumpets D. hisses
48. A lion .
A. cries B. howls C. crows D. roars

In number 49, which name comes at the end of the list in alphabetical order?
49. A. Harare B. Bulawayo C. Mutare D. Gweru

In number 50, choose only one sentence that is written correctly.
50. A. Did you say Sandra Tabeth and Liona are your sisters.

B. did you say sandra, tabeth, and liona are your sisters?

C. Did you say Sandra, Tabeth and Liona are your sisters?

D. Did you say Sandra, Tabeth, and Liona, are your sisters.



--- Page 146 ---
Paper 2

Time: 2 hours

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

widower brick married peasant grew

few crops manure harvest plough

oxen calves tractor ploughing dairy
Widower Jangano

widower Jangano lived alone in a small brick house. His wife had died and he
had not married again. He was a peasant with just a small piece of land. He
put some manure on his small piece of land and his few crops grew very well.

He fenced the small piece of land. So the animals could not eat his crops. Then
he bought a plough and two oxen. He was now using a plough pulled by the
two oxen. Widower Jangano worked hard on his piece of land. He was now
getting a bumper harvest every year. He sold more crops and bought two
dairy cows. Soon, the dairy cows had calves. The dairy cows gave Widower
Jangano a lot of milk.



--- Page 147 ---
Widower Jangano was now selling the crops and the milk. He got enough 3
money to buy a tractor. Today, many people visit Widower Jangano's small
piece of land. They want to learn how to use the land wisely.

Answer these questions.

What is a widower?

What do you call a small farmer with just a small piece of land?
Why could the animals not eat Widower Jangano’s crops?
How did Widower Jangano make his crops grow well?

Why did Widower Jangano buy the two oxen?

What are the cows that give milk called?

Widower Jangano was getting a bumper harvest every year because —.
Why do many people visit Widower Jangano's farm?

What kind of a man was Widower Jangano?

10. What do we learn from this story?

DONO OIA WN

Write on only one of the following.

(i) You have won a prize at school. In 3 - 4 paragraphs, write a letter to your friend
at another school telling him/her this good news about what happened for you
to win this prize. Tell your friend more about the prize itself: what it is, what it looks
like, what your friends and parents said about it and how you will use it.

The body of your letter should be 8 — 12 lines in length.



--- Page 148 ---
(i) Write a composition about someone who was always boasting and ther
something happened that stopped him/her from boasting. In your composition,
say:

-who the person was, and what he/she was always boasting about
-what this person was doing and telling the people
-what the people were thinking about that person
-what happened one day that stopped the person from boasting
-what the people were saying afterwards
-what you have learned from this.
Your composition should be 8 — 12 lines in length.



--- Page 149 ---
A visit to Mrs Mabika’s plot (Part 1)

UNIT

Listen

People with disabilities
Your teacher will tell you about a person with a disability but has done well in life.

In a few sentences, tell the class about a disabled person you know and the good
work that person does or did.

A visit to Mrs Mabika’s plot (Part 1)

visited produce dairy supermarket farming
dozen twelve learned travelled signs
fresh showed waiting although deaf

Last week our class visited Mrs
Mabika’s plot. Mrs Mabika is §
deaf and dumb. She cannot
hear or speak. She speaks to
people in signs. She makes
the signs with her hands. Mrs
Mabika has a plot. The plot is
not very far from our school.
Mrs Mabika uses her plot for
farming. We travelled to see
the plot in the school bus. Mrs
Mabika was waiting for us at
the gate.

She took us around the



--- Page 150 ---
plot. First she took us to the dairy cows. Mrs Mabika keeps a dozen dairy cows
on her plot. The twelve dairy cows produce a lot of milk. Mrs Mabika sells the
fresh milk fo the supermarkets.

Next, Mrs Mabika showed us how to milk the cows. | learned how to milk the
cows on that day. Now | am good at milking my father's cows. Although Mrs
Mabika is a woman, she is a very good farmer.

Answer these questions.

What is a person who is deaf unable to do?

A person who is dumb cannot —.

How does a person who is deaf and dumb speak to other people?
Where is Mrs Mabika’s plot?

How did the learners travel to Mrs Mabika's plot?

What number are a dozen things?

Dairy cows are kept for —.

Mrs Mabika was a school teacher. True/False

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Prepositions that are used with certain words.
These prepositions are used with certain words in A visit to Mrs Mabika'’s plot, Part 1.

at in with on from to for

Go back to the passage and say the sentences with these prepositions, one by
one.

Rewrite the following sentences. Fill the blank spaces with the same prepositions
in the box.
The sentences in the passage will help you to find the right preposition to fill in.

1. The clinicisnotveryfar— my home.

2. My brotheris very good dancing.

3. My friend is waiting —— me near the bus station.

4. Some people do not understand me when | speak — my mother
language.



--- Page 151 ---
5. Many people sell their crafts motorists on the highway.
6. Mother does all the family washing — her own hands.
7. The two children were born the same day.

Using: first, then, after that, while, at the end, last, when
These are words we often use to tell things that follow one another in their good order.

A girl called Shongile wrote about their class visit to an orphanage. An orphanage
is a building or place where orphans are looked after. Orphans are children whose
parents have died. Shongile mixed up the order of the things their class did at the
orphanage.

Rewrite the things that Shongile’s class did at the orphanage in the correct order.

A visit to the orphanage

While some were washing the orphans’ clothes, others were busy cooking.

After the greetings, we sat down to tell the orphans some interesting stories.

First, we greeted the orphans, one by one.

When the clothes were dry, we pressed them with a hot iron.

At the end it was time to say goodbye to the orphans.

Last week our class visited the orphanage next to the hospital.

While some were pressing the clothes, others were washing the plates and the pots.
Then we washed the orphans’ clothes and hung them on the line to dry.

Take turns to read to the class what you have written about A visit to the
orphanage in Write above.

Listen and Write =
Ey

Spelling and dictation
Listen carefully and write the words and sentences that your teacher will call out
from A visit to Mrs Mabika’s plot, Part 1.


--- Page 152 ---
) A visit to Mrs Mabika’s plot (Part 2)

dD Read

A visit to Mrs Mabika’s plot (Part 2)

chicken hatch vegeiables cabbages important
prepared carefully compost gently twice
shades feeding

Mrs Mabika also took us to the chicken run. There were many, many chickens
in the chicken run. The chickens were feeding noisily.

Mrs Mabika said these chickens lay eggs. Mrs
Mabika sells the eggs to the supermarkets. She
sells the eggs before they hatch into chickens.

Lastly Mrs Mabika took us to the vegetable

garden. There were tomatoes, carrots, onions,
cabbages and other vegetables. Although
Mrs Mabika is deaf and dumb, she is a very
good farmer. In the garden, three men were
busy working there. One man was watering
the vegetable beds.

Another man was digging with a big
hoe. He was preparing a seedling
bed. He was going to plant some
seedlings. The man said a seedling
bed is very important. It must be
prepared carefully. It must be
prepared in steps. The man showed
us how to make a seedling bed.



--- Page 153 ---
Imagine that you were in the class that visited Mrs Mabika's plot. Tell the class
| about that visit.
|

Listen

) Listen carefully as your teacher explains the steps in making a seedbed. Follow
the steps in the pictures below.

How to make a seedling bed

Water the soil. Plant the seedlings.

twice a day.



--- Page 154 ---
Using: first, next, then, after that and when, write a paragraph on how to make a seeding
bed.

How to make a seedling bed.

Using a hoe or a pick, first dig
that,
them

and

. Next, .Then, . After
. When the seedlings are planted, water

. Then put shades to

Choose the answer from the passage.
1. Although Mrs Mabika was deaf and dumb, she was a good farmer.
This shows that |
A. women can not be farmers
B. good farmers are women
C. disability does not mean inability
D. farming is a difficult job
2. Although Mrs Mabika was a woman, she was a good farmer.
This shows that —
A. women cannot be good farmers
B. women can be good farmers
C. farming is a job for men only
D. farming is a job for women only
3. Which statement is true?
Mrs Mabika was a lazy farmer.
Mrs Mabika was a busy farmer.
Mrs Mabika disliked the learners.
. The learners ate a lot of fried eggs at Mrs Mabika’s plot.

A.
B.
C.
D

The -ing in some short verbs

Look at the words with -ing as you read this passage aloud:

THE SUNTHTS TEHIMD WNEN HTH HEEIND HUM IHS THOME). HI Hos Ost nDegining ho
rain. | saw two boys. One was sitting down and the other was digging with a big
hoe. Then, as it was getting dark, the two boys started running home.

What do you notice in these words when adding -ing?



--- Page 155 ---
Say the sentences below with the -ing form of the verbs in bold. Remember to
spell the words with -ing correctly.

She was the only girl (sit) among the boys.
The girls were (run) to school.

It's (begin) to get cold in the evenings.
Father was busy (cut) firewood.

My brother is (get) old.

| like to see the sun (set).

When | was a baby, | was (wet) my clothes.
The boys were (swim) in the dam.

When our team was (win) we were cheering.
10. The strong wind was (shut) the doors.

11. Nowadays many people are (fravel) by road.

WONG AWN ~

From Speak above rewrite sentences é - 11 correctly.

4 Write

Writing a short story of what happened.
Thandie is in Grade Three. Last week Thandie's class visited the Old People’s
Home. This is the place where the old people are looked after.

People visit the Old People's Home to help and do something for the old people.
People help in many ways, for example;

— they wash and iron their clothes,

- they plant and water the flowers,

— they mend their clothes,

— they cook for them,

— they clean the house,

— they cut the tall grass in the yard,

— they sweep the yard,

- they plant and water the vegetables in the garden.

Thandie wrote a short story on the visit to the Old People’s Home, but didn't
complete if.
Write the complete story that Thandie had started.

A visit to the Old People’s Home

Last week, my class visited the . The Old People's Home is the place where

. We travelled to the Old People's Home by



--- Page 156 ---
. Then they all came out to
. First we . Next we .
Lastly we . Then it was time to say

When we arrived, the old people were
We told them that we had come to
. After that we

Then we

Listen and Write §&4

Bm

Listen carefully and write the words and sentences that your teacher will call out
from A visit to Mrs Mabika'’s plot (Part 2).



--- Page 157 ---
Revision and assessment 13

Listen

Your teacher will arrange for you to listen to the news on the radio or he will read
the news in a newspaper to you.
Afterwards, report the news that you have just heard to the class. Say it like this:
It was reported that
| heard that

Make your own sentences using:

(a) shall to offer help to someone or to other people

(b) will to ask someone to do something

(c) should to say what is right or what is expected

(d) should not to say what is not right or what is not expected.

Read the following paragraph clearly to the class:

From poor to rich

There was once a poor man who lived with his family in a small hut. His name was
Makadho. One day Makadho knelt down and prayed to his God. In his prayer,
Makadho said, “Oh Lord, please hear me. | wish you could make me rich." The
Lord heard Makadho's prayer and answered, “1 will give you riches if you promise
not to stop working hard.” From that day onwards, Makadho never rested. In a
few years Makadho became rich through hard work. That shows us that we can
all become rich if we work hard. It also shows us that we cannot become rich
unless we work hard.

Write your own two sentences using:
(a) if

(b) unless

(¢) wish



--- Page 158 ---
A Street children

db Read i B

Street children | 1

kids left-overs motorists begging steal

dust pedestrians pilots quite often
passengers taxi tout pavements dangerous
fighting guarding occasionally

Chamie is a street child. He lives on the street with other street kids. The street
kids do not go to school. So they don't learn to read or write. That means
they cannot become teachers, doctors, or pilots one day. They spend alll
their fime on the street. They do not wash. They do not comb their hair or
brush their teeth.

Chamie and other street children spend their time begging. They beg for
money or food from the passing motorists and pedestrians. Sometimes they
steal. Sometimes they eat dirty left-overs thrown into the dust bins. Quite
often street kids fight among themselves for money or food.



--- Page 159 ---
Occasionally, Chamie is washing or guarding the people's cars. Once in a
while he is a taxi tout; calling passengers to the taxis or mini-buses. Chamie
does all these for alittle money. His life on the street is very hard and sometimes
quite dangerous.

Chamie and other street kids sleep on the open pavements of the streets.
When it rains they get wet. In the cold nights they warm themselves on fires
made from burning papers. They become very dirty.

Tell the class what you have read about the street children.

Answer these questions.

1. Who is Chamie?

Where do street children sleep?

What is the other name used for street children?

Why can the street children not become teachers, doctors or pilots like you?
What do street kids often fight for among themselves?

What does a taxi tout do?

How would you describe, in one sentence, the life of a street child?

Would you like to be a street child? Why?

NOOO AWN

Using often
- Read these sentences aloud. Note that the t in often is silent.
Quite often street children fight among themselves for money or for food.
| often visit my friend at his/her home.
On weekends | often play tennis.
It often rains in the evenings.

Complete the sentence below:
Anna often comes late to school.
This means that Anna .
A. never comes late to school.
B. came late to school only once.
C. has come late to school many times.
D. has come late to school on very few days.



--- Page 160 ---
Using often write five correct sentences of your own.
Example: | often come to school by bicycle.

Spelling and dictation
(i) Your teacher will first show you a paragraph to look at from the passage Street
children. Then the teacher will dictate the passage to you as you write it.

Writing a short composition on what you saw.

Imagine that you spent some days watching the street kids. Now you want other
people to know what you saw. Write a short composition about the street kids by
answering the questions below in full sentences. Write your composition in the 4
paragraphs shown. You can get good ideas from the passage Street children.

Street kids

Begin by saying:

Last I spent days watching the street kids in the town of .Who
are the street kids? Do the street kids go to school? Do the street kids learn to read
and to write? Therefore, can the street kids become teachers and doctors when
they grow up?

Do the street kids wash or comb their hair? So how do they look? Where do they
spend all their ime? How do they spend their time? Sometimes what do they do
among themselves? What do the street kids eat? Sometimes what do they do?
Where do they sleep? What happens when it is raining?

Is the life of a street kid very easy or very difficult? Would you like to be a street kid
yourself? What do you advise other boys and girls?

The -ly in words, for example, softly, slowly, loudly, quickly

Read these sentences aloud:
When | was sick, | was talking softly and walking slowly.
When | got well again, | was talking clearly and walking quickly.
Then | began to sing loudly and cheerfully.



--- Page 161 ---
1. What do the words softly and clearly tell us?
(Answer: They tellushow Iwas —
2. What do the words slowly and quickly tell us?
(Answer: They tellushow Iwas
3. What do the words loudly and cheerfully tell us?
(Answer: They tellushow Iwas
Rule: Words that tell us how something is done are called adverbs.

Answer these questions using the adverb from the word in brackets.

1. The school children were singing . (cheerful)

2. It was raining (heavy)

3. In the rainy season, rivers flow (strong)

4. The teacher likes the learners to read their books . (quiet)
5. The moon was shining (bright)

6. You should always write (neat)

7. Father and mother were talking (happy)

8. When travelling, you should dress (smart)

The long y
Say this sentence correctly after your teacher:
My sister, in a nylon dress likes to fry dry meat in a frying pan.

Repeat the sound of the y written in bold.

ty and iry

I cannot fly in the sky,

- And | will not cry because | cannot fly.
1 will not deny that | cannot fly,
And I'm not shy to say that | cannot fly.

In class when | try to multiply,
. And | cannot multiply,
I will not cry because | cannot multiply
And | will not be shy to say that |
cannot multiply.
But i'l iry and try,
Until | can multiply.



--- Page 162 ---
A meeting under the tree

UNIT

A meeting under the tree

enough marry protect young allowed
report warned plantations mines adults

One day Chamie saw many
people sitting under a free. A
tall police officer was talking to
the people.

The police officer said parents
must take care of their children.
Parents must give their children
enough food and good
clothes. When they go to bed,
children must be given warm
blankets. Parents must protect
their children all the time.

All boys and girls should go to
school. Young girls must not be
married off. He said that school
girls are too young to marry.
No-one is allowed to shout
at, scold or beat children.
Children should report to the
police people who scold or
beat them. The children should
not fight among themselves.

He also said children must not do difficult or dangerous jobs. Working in the
plantations is hard and dangerous work. Difficult or dangerous jobs should be
done by adults only. Children should do only light work at home like cleaning
the plates and cups.



--- Page 163 ---
Choose the comrect answer.
1. At the meeting, there were

A. afew people B. many people
C. women only D. children only
2. Who spoke at the meeting?
A. Chamie B. the children
C. the chief D. a police officer
3. At the meeting, it was said that .
A. only boys should go to school B. only girls should go to school

C. children must work hard all the time D. school girls are too young to marry
4. It was also said that people who scold or beat children should
A. be reported to the police B. not fight among themselves
C. take care of their children D. send their children to school
5. This meeting under the tree was about
A. teachers and children in the schools
B. child protection and care
C. the light jobs that the children can do at home
D. the job of a police officer
6. What would you say?
People agreed that difficult or dangerous jobs must not be done.
B. Only parents are allowed to scold or beat their children.
C. Chamie liked what was talked about at the meeting.
D. This meeting was a waste of time for Chamie.

>

right or wrong
Using the jobs listed below, take turns to ask and answer each other like this:
One child asks:

Is it right or wrong to ask childrento —_____ (such as, cut some firewood)?
Another child answers:
It is right to ask children to
It is wrong to ask children to

Here are some jobs that people do everyday:

- cut some firewood. - make a fire for cooking.

- sweep the floor. - clean the bedroom.

- dig in the garden. - dig the water trenches.

- work on the plantations. - water the vegetables.

- do homework. - look after the baby at home.

- herd cattle and goats. - sell vegetables, tomatoes and fruits.
- put up roofs on houses. - help mother to clean the house.

- give the dog some food. - work in the mines.



--- Page 164 ---
- go to the shops to buy bread. - boil some water for tea.

- help the parents at home. - plough or weed in the fields.

- close the gate in the evenings. - prepare food for the family.

- push or pull the cart. - camry bags of maize or mealie-meal.
- wash their own clothes. - fetch water from the borehole.

- cut grass around the home. - wash the plates, pots and cups.

Listen

A children's poem to recite.
Listen carefully as some of you read the poem:

What | need from my parents
| am your own child
My dear mother ond father,
Sol feel free,
To tell you my needs:
Good hedlth,
Good education,
Good shelter,
~ Good clothes,
Clean water,
_ Enough good food
And good friends.

Answer these questions with the help of your teacher:

(i) How do parents give their children good education?

(i) Give examples of good shelter that you as a child need.

(if) Give examples of good clothes a parent should give his/her children.
(iv) What do good friends do?

Using like

Say this sentence from the passage A meeting under the tree:

Children should do only light work at home like cleaning the plates, pots and cups.
Here like is used for stating an example or examples.

Complete the following sentences with suitable endings of your own:

1. At school we play goameslike — and
2. lenjoy eating fruitslike —— and —
3. Some people'snameslike — and —— are funny names.



--- Page 165 ---
4. Some hotmonthslke — and —_____ are not good for sports.
5S. Some coldmonthslke — and are not good for swimming.
6. Somecitieslke —_____and________ are very big.

The -ing form of the verbs

Say this sentence from the passage Street children:
Chamie and other street chidren spend their time begging.
They sleep on the pavements even when it is raining.

The -ing tells us of an action that is going on.

Answer the following questions using the -ing form of the verb given in brackets.
1. How do you spend the evenings? (read books).

(Write: Ispend —
How did you spend the weekend? (fish at the dam).
(Write: | spent

How did you spend the holidays? (visit friends and relatives).
How do children spend their childhood? (go to school).
How do farmers spend their time? (work on the farms).

How do vendors spend the day? (sell different things).
How did your class spend this morning? (learn new things).

Noor w ON

Writing a paragraph

Chamie wanted to remember the main points said by the police officer. But he
could not write.

Imagine that you were asked to write the main points for Chamie by completing
the lines below:

Protecting children

At the meeting, the police officer told the people that. He also said that
parents must —____ . He added that school is not just for boys alone; it is for
both. School girls must not be married off __; they are too. Then
he said that children should report —___. He also warned the children not to

. Lastly, the police officersaid —______. But children can do light work
at home like .

od, Read

Exchange your composition books and read aloud to the class what the other
learner has written in Write above.



--- Page 166 ---
Revision and assessment 14

Listen

Listen to a story about helping others from the Bible. Then, in groups of six, act a
short play about the story you have just heard from the Bible.

Speak to the class about someone you know who needs help. Tell the class:
-who the person is,

-what the person's problem is

-where the person stays,

-how the person lives, and

-what you are asking the class to do to help that person.

Read the following passage to the class.

Mr Zondo and Mr Gumbo were neighbours. Mr Zondo always complained to Mr
Gumbo about his noisy dogs. One dark evening, Mr Gumbo's dogs barked loudly
until early morning. This did not go down well with Mr Zondo at all. He could not
sleep throughout the night. Very early next morning, Mr Zondo was on his way to
see Mr Gumbo again about the noisy dogs. Then, he saw why the dogs were in his
own yard and still barking. The dogs had chased a thief who was going to break
info Mr Zondo's house. To escape from the barking dogs, the thief had climbed
a tall free in Mr Zondo's yard and was still up there. Mr Zondo still went to see Mr
Gumbo; this time not to complain, but to thank him for the good dogs.

Answer these questions from the passage in Read above in full, correct sentences:
What was Mr Zondo always complaining to Mr Gumbo about?

Why did the thief climb a tall free in Mr Zondo's yard?

If it was not for the barking dogs, what was going to happen?

What did Mr Zondo thank Mr Gumbo for in the end?

Do you think after this Mr Zondo stopped complaining about the barking dogs?
Why?

rN



--- Page 167 ---
This environment is our home

Listen

The Environment
Your teacher will tell you about our environment.

Say this poem after your teacher. Learn to recite it in groups of four. Each one in
the group recites only four lines.

A poem about our environment
Look outside: see the frees and the grass growing
All green and clean and beautiful.
Watch the insects flying from flower to flower.
Stand outside ond smell the fresh air.
Listen to the never-ending song of the birds
and the wind.
The sound of the stream water falling on the
rocks.
Look into the cool clean stream water and
. see;
The fish swimming forever happily.

Things won't be like this in the future;

If we continue fo throw:

Broken bottles, empty tins, pieces of metal,

plastic and wood,

On the land, into the streams, everywhere.
- Things won't be good for us either,

If we continue burning grass and cutting

down trees.



--- Page 168 ---
Spelling and dictation
Listen carefully and write the sentences that your teacher will call out from the
poem about the environment.

(i) Your teacher will take you out on a walk fo see the environment around your
school:

(ii) After the walk answer these questions:
- Were there any papers, pieces of wood, broken bottles, plastics lying about?
- Did these things look good to you when you saw them?
- How did they get to be there?
- What do you think should be done?

Ndunaq, the mechanic

swimming clear fresh repair hungry fruits
forest monkeys birds grazing pastures shepherd
herdboys flock herd mechanic garage

Nduna is a mechanic at a garage in the city. His job
is to repair motor-cars. Nduna now lives in the city
where he works.

Nduna grew up on Bhuka Farm, far away from the
city. Everyday after school, Nduna was a shepherd.
He herded sheep. He had a big flock of sheep to look
after. He drove the flock of sheep to the pastures or
grazing lands. There, Nduna met herdboys with their
herds of cattle. Nduna and the herdboys liked to
play together. They played many games while their
animals were grazing. Sometimes they played in the
tall grass. There was cool fresh air. The boys did not
get hungry at all. There were many fruits for them to
eat in the forest frees. Even baboons, monkeys and
birds also ate the fruits.



--- Page 169 ---
Sometimes the boys swam or fished in the clean stream water. The water in
the stream was always clean and clear. It was so clear that they could see
the fish swimming in it. Zebra, kudu, buck and other animals also came to the
stream. They came to drink the clean water in the stream.

Answer these questions.

Who is this passage talking about?

Where did Nduna grow up?

What is a shepherd?

What is a herdboy?

Where does Nduna live now?

What does a mechanic do?

Why did the boys not get hungry?

Why did the animals come to the stream?

Which statement is true?

(a) Nduna did not enjoy his childhood on Bhuka Farm.
(lb) Nduna grew up in the city, far away from Bhuka Farm.
(¢) Nduna enjoyed his childhood on Bhuka Farm.

(d) Nduna still lives on Bhuka Farm.

VON hWN~



--- Page 170 ---
Using so ... that
(i) Read aloud this sentence from the passage Nduna, the mechanic.
The water was so clear that they could see the fish swimming in it.
(i) Say these sentences with: so ... that
The man was so old that he could not run.
The water was so dirty that we could not drink it. '
The moon was so bright that we could play football at night.

- SO heavy that - SO many tha - so slow tha
- sO sick that - so strong that

Select the right so ... that phrases above to complete the sentences.

1. The passengers were one bus could not carry them all on one trip.
2. Thebabywas___ | could not lift him in one hand.

3. The boy in the race was he could not win any of the first three prizes.
4

5

. Janetwas ________ she could not go to school.
. Theropewas it could be used to pull a bus.

A composition
Imagine that you were Nduna in the story you have read. Under the heading My
life so far, write a composition which tells us:

- your name and where you grew up

- your work now.
Remember you are writing as Nduna himself. Therefore, you should use words like:
I, my and me.



--- Page 171 ---
Nduna gets disappointed

Nduna gets disappointed

disappointed metal pieces polluted
thrown rubber empty tin-cans
dying greenish returned floating

One day Nduna decided to visit Bhuka Farm where he grew up. Nduna was
missing the green forests, cool streams, wild animals and fresh air.

When Nduna arrived in Bhuka Farm, he was very disappointed. First he saw
thick black smoke rising into the sky. Some boys were burning old motor-car
tyres. The air was not fresh anymore. The thick smoke had polluted the air.

Nduna looked around on the farm. There were pieces of metal, rubber and
wood lying everywhere. There were broken bottles and empty tin-cans all over.
The land was not clean
anymore. The pieces
of metal, rubber, glass,
plastic and wood had
polluted the land. Nduna
got more disappointed
when he went to the
stream. This is where he
used to swim when he was
a young boy. The water
was heavily polluted. It was
now greenish in colour.
There were bottles and
empty tin-cans floating
in the water. There were
pieces of rubber, plastic,
wood, and cloth in the
water. The fish were dying.
It was unsafe for people
and animals to use this
polluted water. Nduna
returned to the city, a very
disappointed man.



--- Page 172 ---
Pretend that you are Nduna after the visit to Bhuka Farm. You are now back in
town. Tell your friends about your visit to Bhuka Farm.

Choose the correct answer.

1. What disappointed Nduna on his visit to Bhuka Farm?
A. He was missing the forests, the stream, the animals and the fresh air.
B. The pollution of the air, the water, and the land on Bhuka Farm.
C. He wanted to return to the city very quickly.
D. He got hungry and there was nothing for him to eat.

2. What causes pollution?

A. smoke from burning things.

B. throwing rubbish in the streams.

C. throwing pieces of metal, rubber, plastic, glass or cloth anywhere.

D. all the three said in A, B and C above.

Why were the fish dying in the stream water?

Why was the water unsafe for use by the people?

Pollution damages the environment in which we live. True or false?

“hw

More verbs in the past

(i) Nduna decided to visit Bhuka Farm where he grew up.
grew comes from the word grow;
grew tells us what happened in the past or long ago.

(ii) Match the words in List A with their past tense in List B. Say the words in two short
sentences like this:
Today | grow. Yesterday | grew.

List A

know is see do go speak take tell win write
think eat understand sit teach

List B

spoke afte understood was knew went thought sat won
taught did told saw wrote took



--- Page 173 ---
Choose any five verbs in the past tense. Write complete sentences of your own
in which you use these verbs.

Using used to

Read these two sentences from the passage Nduna gets disappointed:
Nduna got more disappointed when he went to the stream.
This is where he used to swim when he was a young boy.

More examples:

When | was in Grade One, | used to drink a lot of milk everyday.

Last year | used to visit my aunt on weekends.

Our dog used to bark at strangers.

It used to rain around Christmas.
Used to says what was true or was happening many times in the past but is not
happening now.

Complete the following sentences with used to:
When | was a baby | used to

Last year our teacherusedto

I is said that long, long ago, people used to
Some time ago the people in our village used to
The learners in our schoolusedto

My friends and | used to

Our family used to

During the school holidays, learners used to

0 NODA WN =

Using the comma ,
Lock at this sentence from the passage Nduna gets disappointed:
Nduna was missing the green forests, cool streams, wild animals and fresh air.
We use the comma between the items that are listed in a row thus:
the green forests, cool streams, wild animals and fresh air.
Note: between the last two items we use and instead of the comma.

Rewrite these sentences correctly putting in the comma where it should be.

| am going home to see my old parents three sisters and two brothers.

For Samping, my father bought the sleeping bags a cooler box and some
00

When | met George | greeted him gave him his book and walked away.
Maria walked into the room greeted me then sat down and began to read her
book.

hr N-



--- Page 174 ---
5. In the forest there are tall trees green bushes tall grass and many plants with
flowers.
é. Inourclass there are noisy learners dirty learners lazy learners and good learners.

Writing a letter pointing out something

Imagine you were Nduna after visiting Bhuka Farm. Write a letter to the owner
of Bhuka Farm telling him/her what disappointed you when you visited the farm.
End your letter by offering to help. Get the ideas from the passage Nduna gets
disappointed.

Then write your letter using the frame given on the next page. The frame gives you !
some tips and the beginnings of the paragraphs.
Note the lines left free in the whole letter.
Your address
The date
Dear Mr /Mrs / Miss

Last — [visited your farm and got very disappointed with what | saw
there.

First | saw

.Thenllookedaroundthe
. Lastly, | went to the

| wish to come tothe farmtotakto if you don't mind.
Bhuka Farmiswherel_____ ~~ and still love the place very much.

How are you? | am well.
Yours truly

(full names)

Listen

Spelling and dictation
Listen carefully and write the words and sentences that your teacher will call out
from the story: Nduna gets disappointed.



--- Page 175 ---
Revision and assessment 15

Listen

Listen carefully and repeat the lines of this short poem after your teacher:

{like to see the rising sun.
And the setting sun,
llike to see the irees, the flowers
The insects and the birds.
That is why
I will not live in the city;
Where there are traffic jams
And crowds of everyone
Always in a hurry.

Answer these questions from the poem in Listen above.

1. Do you think the person who wrote this poem likes or dislikes
(a) life in the rural areas, and why?
(b) life in the city, and why?

2. Do you live in the rural areas or in the city?

3. Do you like or dislike where you are living? Why?

1. Write two sentences using each of these words:
(a) like
(b) dislike



--- Page 176 ---
A birthday present (Part 1)

[UNIT

A birthday present (Part 1)

Madam birthday showed riding supported slope
present excitement brand turns sharing

Madam Mhike bought a brand new bicycle for her son, Jabulani. The new |
bicycle was a birthday present. Jabulani was very pleased with his birthday
present. Jabulani showed his new bicycle to all the boys and girls of the village.
Now Jabulani had a new bicycle to ride to school and back everyday. No
other child in the village had a bicycle.

One day Madam Mhike went to work in the morning. At the end of the day
Madam Mhike returned to her house. When she got home there was a lot of

shouting and excitement.

The village children were taking turns to ride Jabulani's new bicycle. Madam
Mhike was happy that her son was sharing his bicycle with his friends. She gave
the children a packet of sweets to share as they played with the bicycle.

Some children were riding the bicycle going up the slope. Other children liked
to ride the bicycle going down-slope. There were also some children who
were learning to ride a bicycle for the first time. At first, these children fell
to the ground when they tried to ride on their own. Then the other children
supported the bicycle so that they would not fall.



--- Page 177 ---
Tell the class about your next birthday: when it is, what you plan to do on that
day, and the gifts you expect from different people.

Choose the answers from the story: A birthday present (Part 1)

1. Who was Jabulani in this story?
A. the son of Madam Mhike B. the husband of Mrs Mhike
C. one of the village girls D. aman in the village
2. Madam Mhike bought the bicycle .
A. for her to ride to work every morming
B. for the village children to learn to ride a bicycle
C. as a present for Jabulani on his birthday
D. for Jabulani to share with other children in the village
3. Which statement is true?
A. Madam Mhike did not like other children to ride the new bicycle.
B. Jabulani did not let other children ride his new bicycle.
C. Only Jabulani now had a bicycle in the whole village.
D. Many other children had their own bicycles in this village.
4. What was making the village children shout with excitement?
A. They were enjoying themselves at Jabulani's birthday party.
B. They saw Madam Mhike returning from work.
C. They were taking turns to ride the bicycle.
D. They were racing up and down with their bicycles.
5. Which good thing did Jabulani do?
A. He held a birthday party for all the village children.
B. He asked his mother for a birthday present of a new bicycle.
C. He learned to ride a bicycle.
D. He shared his new bicycle with the village children.

Verbs, the action or doing words.

(i) Read this:

Yesterday my friend and | walked to the market. As we walked along, we talked
and laughed and greeted the people who looked at us.

(a) Say all the words with -ed

(b) Say the same words now without the -ed

(c) What do you think the -ed is there for?



--- Page 178 ---
To tell us the truth

To tell us that this happened in the past
. Just to complete the sentence

To show us that this is happening now

Some verbs add -ed when the action happened:
yesterday, last year, last night, last month, two weeks ago and so on.

(iii) Add -ed to the verbs in the box below and make sentences with them.
| Last weekend, | washed my school uniform.

Dow»

work cook wash boil finish turn cross bun ask rush walk pray call

eile the following sentences so that they tell us what happened in the past.
se -ed.
Yesterday it (rain) again.

Mother (return) home from work late last night.

Last year we (plant) many frees.

We (move) into our new house last month.

Last ferm we (learn) many new things at school.

When we were young we (play) many games together.

Last evening our family (listen) to the news on the radio.

Long ago, people (sail) across the seas in small ships.

. Last night I (watch) a game of football on television.

10. Last week the teacher (punish) me for coming late to school.

DONO AhWN—a

Using between for two things and among for more than two things.

(i) Read this:

On Saturday, my father and | drove to see grandmother. Grandmother lives in a
village, away from the city. We drove in father's new car. Our car was between ¢
big lorry and a bus. We travelled on the road that runs between two hills.

or EC RE Fee se ga ee


--- Page 179 ---
J |
|
| When we arrived in the village, we went to Grandmother's hut. There are many |
| huts in the village. Grandmother's hut is built among other huts in the village. There
| is a tall tree among the huts.
| (i) Say the sentences with between
Say the sentences with among
(ii) Complete with A, B or C:
(a) Between is used when .
A. there is one thing |
B. there are two things
C. there are more than two things
(b) Amongisusedwhen _________.
A. there is one thing
B. there are two things |
C. there are more than two things

Fill in using between or among.

1. Our schools built —_____ two rivers.
2. Iwas the children who won prizes at school.
3. We found his book —_____ the teacher's books .
4. That gift must be six and eight years of age.
5. Isawherwithadeepcut ____ her eyes.
6. There is a bull the cattle grazing in the pastures.
7. Please share these fruits the children in your group.
8. Whoistaller ______ you and your sister?
| 9. Many weeds grow the crops that we plant.
| 10. Our country Zimbabwe stretches the Zambezi and the Limpopo
rivers.

@
EE


--- Page 180 ---
Writing a letter to a friend
Imagine that you were Jabulani after receiving the present of a bicycle from your
mother.
in 8 — 12 lines, write a letter to a friend at another school telling him/her:

- what you got as a present, from whom, what for,

- the type, size, colour of the present you got,

- how you are using the present,

- when you hope to visit your friend to show him/her the present.
Remember a letter has an address, a date, a greeting, and an ending.

Listen

Spelling and dictation
Listen carefully and write the words and sentences that your teacher will call out
form the story: A birthday present (Part 1).



--- Page 181 ---
A birthday present (Part 2)

sorry running straight bicycle stolen rushed
arrested police sad find heard

One dark night, Jabulani's bicycle was stolen. The boys and girls in the village
heard that Jabulani's bicycle had been stolen. Everyone in the village was
very sad. The police looked for the bicycle in and around the village. They did
not find the bicycle.

Then, one day two girls came running
and shouting. They went straight to
Madam Mhike. They said to her, “We
saw our bicycle at the shops! A man
at the shops was riding our bicycle!”

Madam Mhike and the two girls

rushed to the shops. Other village
boys and girls too came running fo
the shops. There at the shops was
the man with Jabulani’s bicycle. The
police came at once and arrested
the man. There was a lot of shouting |
and excitement as Jabulani got his
bicycle back. Everyone in the village
was very happy again.

A short play to act in pairs

Imagine that you are reporting a stolen bicycle or any other thing to the police.
You are reporting to the police officer who is asking you some questions like:
What was stolen? Where? When? How does it look like? Who do you think

stole it? and so on.



--- Page 182 ---
Answer these questions from the story A birthday present (Part 2).

1. Why was everyone in the village sad?

A. Madam Mhike had bought a bicycle for her son.

B. Jabulani did not like to share his bicycle.

C. Jabulani's bicycle had been stolen.

D. The police did not come to look for the stolen bicycle.
2. Who had stolen Jabulani's bicycle?

A. aman at the shops B. two village girls
C. someone from the village D. the police

3. When Jabulani's bicycle was stolen, the children of the village .
A. knew who had stolen it B. helped to look for the stolen bicycle
C. were very happy D. did nothing about it

4. Who found the stolen bicycle?
A. the police B. Madam Mhike
C. Jabulani himself D. some village children

5. This story showsthat |
A. the village children liked Madam Mhike
B. the village children disliked Madam Mhike
C. Madam Mhike bought another new bicycle for Jabulani
D. a policeman was riding Jabulani’s bicycle at the shops

Using verbs with -es

(i) Read aloud this paragraph:

Everyday Mr Moyo goes to work. He teaches at a primary school. First he washes
himself and brushes his hair. After he finishes having breakfast, he catches the
early morning bus. If he misses that bus, he fetches his bicycle from the garage
and rushes off. He passes through the village. Sometimes he pushes his bicycle
along. Mrs Moyo watches her husband as he rushes off to work. She does not go
out. She bakes cakes at home. First, she mixes flour, sugar and a little salt before
she bakes the cakes.

(i) Say all the vérbs with -es
(iii) Say the same verbs now without -es
(iv) What sound do you hear at the end of the verbs before adding -es?

Note: (a) In everyday actions verbs that end with: -ss -ch -sh -x -z, add -es
(b) In everyday actions, verbs do and go also add -es


--- Page 183 ---
Rewrite the sentences below with the correct form and spelling of the verb in
brackets.

Afterwards say the sentences and the verbs correctly.

1. The bus (pass) through the township every morning.

2. My father (teach) at a secondary school.

Janet (watch) television every evening.

Mother (kiss) her children before they go fo school.

That boy (do) his homework carefully.

A good girl (brush) her teeth after eating.

Joseph (go) to school on foot every morning.

Father always (switch) off the lights before going to sleep.

. This drink (fizz) when you open the lid of the bottle.

10. A snake (hiss).

11. When baking cakes, mother (mix) flour, sugar and a little salt.

0.00 NO A 0

Writing a letter with good news to a friend.
Imagine that you are Jabulani after the stolen bicycle had been handed back to you.
Write a letter with the good news to your friend at another school telling him/her:
- what happened after your last letter to him/her, where, when,
- what you and other people did to find the bicycle,
- who finally found the bicycle, where, with whom,
- that you and the village children were very happy that you got your
bicycle back,
- what you are doing now so that you do not lose the bicycle again,
The body of your letter should be in 3 — 4 paragraphs.



--- Page 184 ---
Using adverbs

The teacher was writing notes about some learners in his class.

(i) This is what he wrote against the learners’ names and pictures:

1. Bongani Moyo

2. Tabeth Gomo

3. Grace Sibanda

4. Tarisai Mukiwa

5. Melusi Mpala

Always late for school.
Everyday he misses the first lesson.

Sometimes late for school.
She was late only twice in the last
three weeks.

Never late for school. She is present
everyday when school starts.

Often late for school. He arrives late on
many days of the term.

Seldom late for school. He arrives late
on very few days of the term.

He was late only once in the whole of
last term.



--- Page 185 ---
(i) Read out all the words that tell us about each learner's late coming to school.
(i) Imagine you were giving prizes to these children, starting with:

the best child,

the second best,

then third, fourth and fifth.

Say:
The best child is
The second best child is
The third child is
The fourth child is
The fifth and last child is

because.
because
because
because
because

Ch WN—

(iv) Using: seldom, often, always, sometimes, never
Match the phrases in the box on the left with the phrases in the box on the right.

. We use always for __ things that happen many times but not all the time.
. We use sometimes for —_ | things that do not happen at all.

. We use never for things that happen once after a very long time.
. We use often for things that happen all the time.
. We use seldom for things that happen many different times.

)

(v

Fillin: often sometimes seldom always never
I visit my uncle in the village. | was there three or four times this year.

We see wild animals here. We last saw a hippo here more than a
year ago.
We get snow in our country; it's always quite warm or even hot.

It is cold in winter; so we have to wear warm clothes all the time.

| go to school on foot; by bicycle.

hw b=

Writing what happened in the past with verbs that end with the letter -e

(i) Read this:
Last week when | arrived home from school, | smiled and danced with joy
when | received a present from my mother. | liked the present and promised
mother that | would always be a good child. Mother was pleased and stated
that she too would always be a good mother.
(a) Read all the words with =d in them.
(b) Read the same words again, now without the -d
(c) What do you think the —d is there for?



--- Page 186 ---
Note: some verbs that end with -e add -d when the action happened:
yesterday, last week, last month, last year, some time ago, and so on.
(i) Add -d to these verbs and make your own sentences with them.

For example, Last night | closed the gate when it was getting dark.

use refuse bake waste close love move practice wave

(i) Select any five verbs from the box above. Write sentences with the verbs you
have selected showing that the actions happened in the past. Begin or end
your sentences with words like:
yesterday, last week, last month, last year, two days ago, two weeks ago

(iii) Read the sentences you have written to the class.



--- Page 187 ---
Note: some verbs that end with -e add -d when the action happened:
yesterday, last week, last month, last year, some time ago, and so on.
(i) Add -d to these verbs and make your own sentences with them.

For example, Last night | closed the gate when it was getting dark.

use refuse bake waste close love move practice wave

(i) Select any five verbs from the box above. Write sentences with the verbs you
have selected showing that the actions happened in the past. Begin or end
your sentences with words like:
yesterday, last week, last month, last year, two days ago, two weeks ago

(iii) Read the sentences you have written to the class.



--- Page 188 ---
Revision and assessment 16

Listen

isten carefully and carry out the three or more things that your teacher tells you
o do:
(i) Walk to the front/back of the class with your right/left hand raised.
Then walk back to your group this time with your left/right hand raised.
When you get pi your group, sit between — (name) and —— (name)
or,
(ii) Walk four/five/six steps forwards/backwards while looking sideways.
Then stop and stand on your left/right leg while you count up to five/eight and
sO on.
After that go and sit on the teacher's chair/stand on the doorway/near the
window.

Imagine that one of your relatives has given you a birthday present that is very
useful to you.
Tell the class about that birthday present:

-when your birthday was

_the relative who gave you the birthday present

-the name of the birthday present

-what you use the birthday present for.

Read this paragraph aloud to the class.

Some of the things that people do make other things happen. For example, one
man started a big veld fire. The veld fire destroyed the grass and the trees. The
cattle, goats and sheep and were left with no grass to eat. Many of them died
of hunger. The farmers were left with no cows for milking and no oxen to pull the
plough. The wild animals like baboons, monkeys and some birds were left with no
fruits to eat. These wild animals went to the people's crop fields. They began to
feed on the crops. At the end of the season, the farmers had no crops to sell. The
farmers could not buy new clothes for their children or send the children to school.

All these problems began when one man started a veld firel

Write your own paragraph in which one thing leads to another. Use words like:
firstly, then, while, after that, finally/lastly

¢


--- Page 189 ---
The calendar

Look at the calendar. Answer the following questions.

How many months are shown on the calendar? (count them)
What is the name of the first / second / third month and so on?
. Say the number of days in each month.

How many weeks are there in one month?

Name the days of the week.

How many days are in the week?

What day is it foday?

What day will if be fomorrow?

What day was it yesterday?

VON AWN—

Do you remember how many days are in each month of the year? Here is a poem

to help you answer that question.
(i) Learn it by heart and recite it to your friends.

Thirty days have September,

April, June and November.

All the rest have thirty-one days.
Except February alone:

Which has twenty-eight days clear
And twenty-nine {days} in each ledp
year.

After reciting the poem above, answer these questions: -
Which months have thirty days eacn?

How many months have thirty days each?

Which one month has twenty-eight or twenty-nine days?
Which are the remaining months with thirty-one days each?

How many months have thirty-one days each?

SA al ad



--- Page 190 ---
Adjectives of position
(i) Look at this picture:

5
Cc
3

Kudzi

< Chipo

<— Tom
Ny < Maria
«— Ben

Qo
=
wv)

<— Rudo
«— Sofie
<«— Paul

(ii) Using the adjectives of position in the box below, say the names of the learners
and their position in the race shown in the picture above:
The last child in the race is Sandra.
The second child in the race is
Use these adjectives of position:

nineth fifth eleventh second eighth first
sixth twelfth third seventh fourth tenth

Some adjectives of the weather
Answer the questions that your teacher will ask you about the weather.

For example, is the weather sunny/cloudy/windy/cold/misty/wet and so on.
(i) Read and enjoy this poem talking about the weather: The changing weather.

A game to play
As a class race (run) round the playground. At the end of the race stand in the
positions you came to the finishing line: (first/second/third and so on). Say your

positions in the race.



--- Page 191 ---
Teacher asks: Who was first/seventh/twelfth and so on?

Listen

Listen to the teacher's questions about the months of the year and answer correctly
in full sentences:

What is the name of the first/second/(up to) twelfth month of the year?

Writing the dates in numerals.

Look at this short paragraph:

These were the closing dates for the schools in the year 2015. In the first term, the
schools closed on 12 April 2015 or 12-04-2015. In the second term, the schools
closed on 3 August 2015 or 03-08-2015. In the third term, the schools closed on
4 December 2015 or 04-12-2015.

Answer these questions giving the dates in full and then in numerals as shown
above:

When is your birthday?

What is the date today?

When did Zimbabwe become independent?

When did schools open this term?

When will schools close this term?

When are the Heroes' Day celebrations held in Zimbabwe?

cA ON-

I like the changing weather in our country.
Sunny weather gives us the bright sunlight.
Cloudy weather hides the sun and the blue sky from us.
Misty weather is like the smoke that covers the hills and the mountains.
Windy weather sometimes blows off the roofs of our houses.
In hot weather we like to sit in the shade.
Cold weather has low temperatures thot force us to wear warm clothes.
In chilly weather the temperatures are very low and we sit by the fireside.
Scorching weather is the best weather for swimming.
In wet weather we camry our umbrellas wherever we go.
Dry weather has no rain and is not good for plants and animals,
like the cool weather; it is in between cold weather and hot weather.



--- Page 192 ---
From the poem: The changing weather, answer these questions about the weather:
1. Is the weather in our country always the same?

2. In what weather do we not see the sun?

3. In what weather do people like to sit by the fire-side?

4. What weather looks like smoke?

5. In what weather do people like to swim?

6. In what weather do people carry their umbrellas when they go out?



--- Page 193 ---
Imagine that this letter was written to you by a pen friend who lives in England.
Write a reply to this letter.

Number 15 Sussex Road

Walrus East

London ‘

England

16 September 2016
Dear Tendai

| would like to visit your country sometime next year. There are a few questions
| wish to ask you before | travel.

What is the best season to visit your country? How is the weather in that season?
Which are the months for that season? Tell me about the vegetation in that
season.

| wish to visit the Great Zimbabwe Ruins and the Victoria Falls when | come to
Zimbabwe. Can you please tell me two other places of interest that | can also
visit during my stay in your country. How do visitors travel to these places of
interest?

Looking forward to visiting your country and hopefully seeing you also.
My regards and very good wishes.
Your loving friend

Thomas Benson



--- Page 194 ---
The elephant

Read
The elephant
tourists national parks branches hosepipe trunk huge
actually breathing frumpeting poachers permission ivory
poaching female tusks

Many tourists come to Zimbabwe on holiday to see the wild animals. Tourists
bring a lot of money into the country. One of the animals the tourists like to see
is the elephant.

There is no other land animal bigger than the elephant. Elephants can be seen
in the national game parks in the country. Some of the big National Parks are:
* Hwange National Park, * Chizarira National Park,
* Gonarezhou National Park, * Zambezi National Park, and
* Mana Pools National Park.
Elephants eat tree leaves, roots, fruit, tree bark, small tree branches and
grasses. Elephants are always on the move, looking for food.



--- Page 195 ---
An elephant has a long
frunk that looks like a
huge hosepipe. The trunk
is actudlly the nose, used
for breathing, smelling
and trumpeting. When
an elephant trumpets, it
makes a high and loud
sound. The trunk is also for
lifting food and waterinto
the mouth. An elephant
drinks about two hundred
litres of water everyday.

Both male and female
elephants have tusks

which look like white horns. Elephants use their tusks for digging and finding food
and for fighting. Elephants are often kiled by some poachers who want their
tusks. Poachers are people who catch or kill wild animals without permission.

The tusks are then sold and used to make ivory. If poaching is not stopped,
there will be no wild animals left in a few years’ time.

Take turns to tell the class what you now know about the elephant.

Answer these questions.
1. Why are tourists good for our country?
A. They come from other countries
B. They travel on holiday
C. They bring a lot of money into the country
D. They come to see elephants and other animals
2. There is no other land animal bigger than the elephant. This means that
some land animals are bigger than the elephant.
B. the elephant is not a very big animal.
C. elephants are not the only big animals on the land.
D. the elephant is the biggest animal on the land.

>



--- Page 196 ---
3. Why are elephants always on the move?
A. Running away from the poachers.
B. Protecting themselves.
C. Looking for food and water.
D. They are very big.
4. Ivory comes from
A. the elephant tusks
B. the elephant trunks
C. the flesh of an elephant
D. the bones of an elephant
5. What do you call the sound made by an elephant?
A. smelling
B. trumpeting
C. poaching
D. digging
6. What does a poacher do?
A. A poacher catches or kills wild animals without permission.
B. A poacher visits other countries on holiday.
C. A poacher brings a lot of money into the country.
D. A poacher looks after the elephants and other wild animals.
7. What does the passage say about poaching?
A. tis a good practice.
B. Itis bad and must be stopped.
C. It can be done for adult animals only.
D. Itis very dangerous for people.
8. The poachers of elephants are mainly people who
A. want elephant meat
B. want their tusks for ivory
C. come on holiday to see wild animals
D. are just cruel to the animals

Listen

Sounds made by animals.
Listen carefully while one of you reads this passage. Imitate the sounds that are
mentioned in the passage.

When the cock crowed, we got up, ready to go! A friendly cat meowed as we set
out with our dogs. It was still dark when we walked past the animal kraals of the
village. As if to greet us, a cow mooed, a sheep bleated, and a pig grunted. Far
away, a donkey brayed. We were all the time very afraid of stepping on snakes.
No snake hissed in anger at us. Then we got to a stream and our dogs barked.
Soon after that an elephant frumpeted loudly. We all shook with fear. There was
more fear when a lion reared behind a small hill nearby.



--- Page 197 ---
Using the verbs that say the animal sounds in the passage above, match the
animals and their verb sounds in the box below:

An elephant MEeoWws.
A dog Crows.
A cat bleats.
A cock Moos.
A sheep roqrs.

A donkey hisses.
A lion grunts.

A pig trumpets.
. Asnake _____ barks.
0. Acow brays.

An adjective tells us about the noun.
These adjectives were used fo tell us about different nouns in the passage.

eleventh first warm wild huge green last high white cold

Fill in the blank spaces with the right adjective from the box above.
1. After the rains, there was a lot of grass.
2. Friday is the school day of the week.

3. Winteris a season.

4, On a cold day, | take a drink.

5. November is the month of the year.

6

7

8

9

1

. We usually get temperatures in the hot season.

. An elephant has a long trunk that looks like a hosepipe.
. The tusks of an elephant are in colour.

school day in the week.

animal.

. Monday is the
0. An elephant is a

You have been to a national park where you spent a lot of time watching elephants
and learning about them. In 8 — 12 lines write a letter to a friend telling her/him
what you have learned about elephants. Remember to put the: address, date,
greeting and ending fo your letter.



--- Page 198 ---
Start by saying:
I was in the National Park for
about them. Elephants are

Listen

Spelling and dictation
Listen carefully and write the words and sentences that your teacher will call out
from the reading passage on elephants.

days. | was watching elephants and

Under the heading The big Game Parks of Zimbabwe, draw a map of Zimbabwe
showing the four areas where elephants are found. Underneath the map complete
this sentence by writing the names of 5-10 animals:

The names of other wild animals found in these big Game Parks are:

(remember to put a comma between the names that you write)



--- Page 199 ---
Revision and assessment 17

Listen

Listen carefully as your teacher reads these two paragraphs to you:

Poachers and poaching

People who kill our wild animals without permission are called poachers. Zimbabwe
has a big problem of poachers who go into the National Parks to kill our elephants,
our rhinos and other animals.

The problem of poaching does not end with our animals. There are fish poachers,
grass poachers, timber poachers, firewood poachers, and sand poachers. Maybe
you have seen some of these poachers and did not know that they were indeed
poachers. Poaching is a crime and should be reported to the police.

Take turns to read aloud the paragraphs on Poachers and poaching from Listen
above.

Imagine that you were working as a game ranger protecting wild animals against
poachers in a national park somewhere in Zimbabwe. Game rangers carry guns
and can fire at or shoot poachers. Poachers too carry guns and can fire them at
wild animals or even at the game rangers.
Write two paragraphs about the day your group of game rangers came across a
group of poachers.
In the paragraphs, say:

-what time of day you came across the poachers

-how many the poachers were; and how many game rangers you were

-the weapons both sides were carrying

-what the poachers were doing when you saw them

-what happened next

-how it all ended.


--- Page 200 ---
Directions

Listen

Quietly, follow the teacher's actions and words thus:
The sun rises in the east. ( facing and pointing to the east)

* The sun sets in the west. (turning and pointing to the west)

e The is to the north of the school. (mentioning a place to the north;
turning and pointing there)

* The is to the south of the school. (also mentioning a place to the
south; turning and pointing there)

Standing outside, and with arms out-stretched sideways, take turns to recite this
short poem while facing where the sun rises every morning.

One morning!

One morning | stood outside

With my arms out-stretched sideways.
A new day was beginning.

And | was facing the east;

Looking at the beautiful sun

Rising in the far east.

| realised that:

My out-stretched arms were
pointing somewhere:

The right arm - pointing to the south,
While the left arm was pointing to the north,
And that my back was facing the west,
Where the sun sets

At the end of everyday.

After reciting the poem above, answer these questions using: south, west, east,
north while pointing the direction:
1. Where does the sun rise every morning?

(Answer: The sunrises in the )



--- Page 201 ---
2. Where does the sun set?
(Answer: The sun sets in the )
3. If you stand with outstretched arms and facing the east:
(a) where is your right arm pointing to?
(b) where is your left arm pointing to?
(c) where is your back facing?
(Answer: If | stand with out-stretched arms facing the east,
(a) my right arm is pointing to the
(b) my left arm is pointing to the
(c) my back is facing the
4. Is your home to the east, to the south, to the west or to the north of the school?

Look at this map showing the Rugare Homestead and some of the places around
it. Read the map using: north, south, east, west

Say: The cattle kraal is to the west of the main house.

The pastures are to the north of the cattle kraal.

a

Mr Rugare’s homestead

The Rugare Homestead has one main house and a hut. The hut is to the of
the main house. The rubbish pit is to the of the hut. To the of the
main house is the latrine. The chicken run is to the of the hut; but to the
of the latrines. Further of the latrine is the orchard. The cattle kraal
of the main house; but of the pastures.

is to the



--- Page 202 ---
This is a map of our country, Zimbabwe.
Using: north, east, south and west, read the map of Zimbabwe like this:
Zambia is to the north of Zimbabwe.
The Matopo Hills are to the west of Bulawayo.

Read

Criss-crossing Zimbabwe

haulage trucks highway border goods neighbour
southern northern western eastern travel passengers
westwards southwards eastwards bridge

Everyday heavy haulage trucks travel along Zimbabwe's highways. The heavy
haulage frucks carry heavy goods across the borders of the countries. Some



--- Page 203 ---
haulage trucks travel southwards, others travel northwards. The haulage trucks
Cross into Zimbabwe from Zambia. Zambia is Zimbabwe's northern neighbour.
The trucks cross the Zambezi River at Chirundu. The Zambezi River forms
Zimbabwe's northern border with Zambia,

The trucks travel southwards until they cross the Limpopo River at Beitbridge.
The Limpopo River forms Zimbabwe's southern border with South Africa. South
Africa is Zimbabwe's southern neighbour.

Everyday, many big buses travel
along the highways across
Zimbabwe. The buses camry many
passengers across Zimbabwe.
Some buses travel eastwards, others
travel westwards. Some buses
travel northwards, others travel
southwards. The buses travelling
eastwards from Botswana cross into
Zimbabwe at Plumiree. Botswana is
Zimbabwe's western neighbour.

Plumtree is on Zimbabwe's western border with Botswana. The buses travel
eastwards until they get to Mutare in the east. Mutareisnear Zimbabwe's eastern
border with Mozambique. Mozambique is Zimbabwe's eastern neighbour.


--- Page 204 ---
Answer these questions.

1. What do you think heavy haulage trucks are?

2. What are the people travelling by bus called?

3. Choose the correct word to complete the sentence:
(i) The word border means the same as the word

A. country B. river C. journey D. boundary

(ii) A neighbour is someone who lives . :
A. next to you B. far away from you
C. inyour house D. in another country

Answer these questions using western, eastern, southern and northern.
4. On which Zimbabwe border is:

(a) Beitbridge?

(b) Plumtree?

(¢) Chirundu?

(d) Mutare? |
5. Complete these sentences using eastern, northern, western and southern.

(a) Zambia is Zimbabwe's neighbour.

(b) South Africa is Zimbabwe's neighbour.
(c) Mozambique is Zimbabwe's neighbour.
(d) Botswana is Zimbabwe's neighbour.

Using adverbs that show direction of movement

Complete these sentences with the right direction adverb. Choose your
adverbs from: westwards, northwards, eastwards, upwards, southwards, forward,
backwards, downwards

1. When you are going you are moving facing the south.

2. When you count you are counting going up the numbers.

3. When you are going you are moving facing the west.

4. When you are going you are moving in the direction that is in front of
you.

5. When you count you are counting going down the numbers.

6. When you are going you are moving facing the north.

7. When you are going you are moving in the direction that is behind you.

8. When you are going you are moving facing the east.

(roo i



--- Page 205 ---
=

Where is our country, Zimbabwe?
We can answer this question by writing a short composition using the words in the
box:

north east west south southern northern eastern western

Look again at the map of Zimbabwe in Speak. Then complete this composition
frame-work using the words in the box above. The first sentence has been done
for you.

Our country, Zimbabwe

Our country, Zimbabwe is in southern Africa. It is between the Zambezi River in the
and the Limpopo River in the .

The Zambezi River in the north forms the — border between Zimbabwe
and Zambia. In the south, the Limpopo Riverformsthe border between
Zimbabwe and South Africa.

Zimbabwe is an inland country, surrounded by other countries. To the

of Zimbabwe is Zambia and to the —______is South Africa. Botswana is to the
while Mozambique istothe of Zimbabwe.
There are many high mountains along the border with Mozambique.



--- Page 206 ---
Zuva village

Read

Zuva Village

built plain flat distance sank unclean flows
fence harvests destroying latrines rubbish pits throwing
litter solar firewood instead signpost wood-lot prevent
planting

Zuva Village is built on a flat plain. To the east of the village there is a high
mountain. A stream flows westwards past the village from this high mountain.
First, the people of Zuva Village built a school. Before that, the learners were
walking a long distance to get to the nearest school.

SN fe



--- Page 207 ---
After that the people of Zuva Village
sank a borehole. Now, the people of
Zuva Village drink clean water from
the borehole. Before that, they were
drinking unclean water from the stream
that flows past the village.

The people of Zuva Village put a wire
fence right round their fields. Now the
people get good harvests. Before that
the animals were destroying the crops
in the fields. Next, the villagers built a
new road from the village to the main
road. The buses are now able to drive
right up to Zuva Village. The villagers
no longer walk far to the main road to
catch the buses.

Now, the people of Zuva Village have
built latrines and dug rubbish pits.
Before that they were throwing the litter
everywhere. They were also using the
bush as their toilet.

The people of Zuva Village now use solar power for lighting and cooking.
Before that, they were cutting a lot of frees for firewood. Instead, the people
of Zuva Village are planting many trees. They have put a big signpost at the
gate into the wood-lot. The signpost reads:

Prevent veld fires

Answer these questions.

ONO AWN

Where is Zuva Village built?

What is a stream?

What was the first thing the people of Zuva Village built?

Are the people of Zuva Village still drinking unclean water? Why?

Why are the people of Zuva Village now getting good harvests?

What is a rubbish pit used for?

Would you say the people of Zuva Village were lazy or hard-working?
What two things are the people of Zuva Village telling other people to do?



--- Page 208 ---
Say the following sentences with the words very good or very bad.

Preventing grass fires is

Burning grass is —-
Drinking running water from a stream i is
Building and using latrines is

Planting many treesis
Throwing the litter into the rubbish pits is

Complete the following sentences with the words very good or very bad.

Cutting trees for firewood is

Destroying or puling down the road signs is
Goingtoschoolis |

Dropping out of schoolis
Throwing litter into the streams, rivers and dams i is
ihe the bush as our toilet is

Using | because

Did you understand the story about Zuva Village? Complete the following
sentences with because. Give the reason why.

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

The people of Zuva Village no longer drink unclean water from the stream
because

Now they are getting good harvests because

The villagers no longer walk a long distance to the main road because

The villagers no longer use the bush as their toilet because

They no longer cut trees for firewood because

They no longer throw litter everywhere because

Using the right adjective

(i) Read this aloud:

(a) A father bought a pair of shoes, a shirt, a hat, and a toy car for his son.
In the sentence above, we do not know what kind of a father, shoes, a
shirt, a hat, a toy car and a son.



--- Page 209 ---
(b) A loving father bought a pair of black shoes, a white shirt, a new hat, and
a big toy car for his young son.
In the sentence above we know what kind of a father, shoes, shirt, hat,
toy car and son.
(ii) Tell the class what kind of:
(a) father, (b) shoes, (c) shirt, (d) hat, (e) toy car and (f) son.
The words they tell us what kind of are called adjectives
(ii) What do you say is the work of an adjective?
A. To complete sentences.
B. To ask questions.
C. To give the reason why.
D. To tell us about the nouns.

Choose the best adjective to tell us about the noun that follows it:
People must not drink (easy/long/ugly/dirty) water.

We went on a (long/heavy/loud/tall) journey by bus.

There are (sharp/happy/beautiful/khaki) flowers around the church.
| like to sleep on a (sad/comfortable/slow/grey) bed.

The (thick/narrow/last/high) child in our family is a boy.

Swimming is best on a (round/sweet/hot/fast) day.

The (hungry/cold/few/hard) man begged for some food.

When there is no moon, we have very (angry/big/dark/small) nights.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

By completing the lines below, write a short summary of the goed things that the
people of Zuva Village did under the heading:

| salute the Zuva Villagers

First, the Zuva Villagers
that, they were drinking
with the help of the
a long distance to the
Now, they no longer throw.
. They have also started a
reasons, | salute the

because their children

Next, they. . Before
. After that, they. . Now, the animals cannot . Then
they built a . Now, the villagers no longer walk
. The villagers have also built and dug
. Instead of using firewood, the villagers now use
where they have planted For these



--- Page 210 ---
Look at the signpost on veld fires that was written by the people of Zuva Village.
Write your own signpost warning people:

(i) not to pass through your field with crops

(i) not drink the tap water as it is sewage water only good for irrigation

(ii) that it is dangerous to sit near the poles camrying electric lines

(iv) not to enter your home yard because there are dogs that bite strangers

(v) to drive carefully past an ECD centre.



--- Page 211 ---
End of term 3 revision and assessment

Paper 1
My journey
bright carrying back-pack travelling station shadow
switched torch-light vehicle disappointed silence crowd
wondered lying damaged helicopter

| heard a deep voice calling me, “Barnabas! Barnabas!” | knew that it was my
father. Outside there was a bright full moon when | got out of my bedroom.
Then we started walking to the bus station. Father was taking me only as far as
the bus station.

At the stream, it was dark with the shadows of the big trees growing together.
Father switched on the torch-light on his cell phone. Then we could see where
to cross the stream.

When we got to the bus stop, Gogo Gudo was there already. She said the bus
had gone, leaving her behind. It was full and did not even stop at the station.
| got worried because this was the only bus that was going to the city.

Just then a big car came along and stopped. The driver kindly agreed to give
the two of us a lift to the city. After travelling for about an hour we saw the bus
that had left us behind. It was parked on the left side of the road on a cattle
farm. A big crowd of people was standing outside the bus.

We wondered why the bus had stopped here. Then as we got nearer | saw
a big cow lying on the road. The bus had hit the big cow. The bus itself was
badly damaged in the front and it could not travel any further.



--- Page 212 ---
In numbers 1-5 choose the answer from the passage above:

1. Who wrote this story?
A. Barnabas’ father B. Gogo Gudo
C. Barnabas D. The bus driver
2. They started walking to the bus station |
A. when it was still dark B. at sunrise
C. at sunset D. at mid-day
3. Where was the bus going?
A. to the city B. from the city
C. to the stream D. to a cattle farm
4. Why did the bus not stop at the bus station?
A. It was badly damaged in the front B. It was already full
C. There was nobody at the bus station D. It was too fast

5. Which statement is true?
A. Barnabas’ father was also going to the city.
B. Barnabas’ father was not travelling to the city.
C. Gogo Gudo was in the bus when it hit a big cow.
D. Barnabas was in the bus when it hit a big cow.

In numbers 6 -8 choose the correct form of the verb.

6. The smart gil her teeth everyday.

A. brush B. brushes C. brushing D. brushed
7. Yesterday | to the market to buy vegetables.

A. go B. goes C. going D. went



--- Page 213 ---
8. We met the two boys aswewere __ 10 school.

A. run B. ran C. running D. runs

In numbers 9 - 12 choose the correct preposition to fill in the gap.

9. Inclasslsit — James and Thandie.
A. of B. between C. among D. at

10. That girlis afraid the dog.
A. with B. by C. at D. of

11. My motheris very good —______ baking cakes.
A. in B. for C. at D. with

12. The sweets were shared the five girls.
A. to B. between C. with D. among

In numbers 13 - 14 which is the silent letter in the word?

13. thumb A. b B. h C. m D.u

14. listen A. i B. s C. t D. e

In numbers 15 - 18 choose the best adjectives to fill in the gaps.

15. Elephants, baboons, monkeys and giraffe are all animals.
A. kind B. wild C. huge D. cloudy

16. During the —____ weather, we sat by the fireside inside the house.
A. long B. chilly C. loud D. few

17. Wewrotea _______ test at the end of the term.
A. difficult B. smooth C. dirty D. happy

18. We could not climb the —____ mountain near our home.
A. quick B. high C. new D. deep

In numbers 19-20 choose the right word to fill in the gap.
19. A dog barks; and an elephant

A. trumpets B. roars C. crows D. bleats
20. Apersonruns; anda horse
A. crawls B. flies C. gallops D. slides

In numbers 21 - 23 choose the right adverb

21. counted —____ from ten to one.
A. downwards B. upwards C. forwards D. onwards
22. The teacher asked the children to move —__ a litlle from the front.
A. forward B. backwards C. towards D. upwards
23. The new baby boy was given his father's name —____ after his birth.
A. soon B. often C. always D. seldom
In numbers 24 - 25 choose the right words to fill in the gap.
24. While some boys were reading theirbooks, — were playing games outside.
A. some B. another C. others D. the other
25. | closed the door — to keep out the cold wind.

A. in order B. because of C.so that D. although



--- Page 214 ---
Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

The Victoria Falls are on the big Zambezi River, between Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The first white man to see the falls was David Livingstone. He named the falls after
Queen Victoria who was queen of England at the time. Before then, the local
people called the falls Mosi-oa-Tunya meaning ‘the smoke that thunders’.

A huge amount of water drops from the flat, wide rock into a deep gorge below,
making white sprays of water that can be seen for kilometers around. From afar,
these water sprays look like fire smoke rising in the sky.

The Victoria Falls are a world heritage site. This means the falls are a very important
place in the history of our country and the world. Every year, many tourists from
all over the world come to Zimbabwe on holiday. Besides wanting fo see other
heritage sites like the Zimbabwe Ruins, or the wild animals in the big game parks,
most of the tourists come to see the majestic Victoria Falls. Tourists bring a lot of
money into the countries they visit.

Just below the falls is the historic Victoria Falls Bridge which is a railway crossing
between Zambia and Zimbabwe. Here people do what is known as bungee
jumping, a sport for the fearless people. Tied to the bridge with a stretching rope
round the ankles, the bungee jumper leaps down into the deep gorge of the
Zambezi River like a bird flying downwards. Of course, the rope does not break
and the bungee jumper does not hit the water or the earth below.

In numbers 26 - 32 choose the answer from the passage above.
26. The Victoria Falls were named after |

A. David Livingstone B. the Zambezi River

C. the then queen of England D. the visiting tourists
27. Aheritagesiteis — |

A. a game park with wild animals

B. a place that is very important to many people

C. a sport for the fearless

D. a dangerous place to visit
28. What does ‘Mosi-oa-Tunya’ mean?

A. The smoke that thunders. B. Bungee jumping.

C. A heritage site. D. A flat rock before a deep gorge.
29. Why are tourists welcomed in the countries they visit?

A. They travel on holiday.

B. They bring money to the countries they visit.

C. To see the Victoria Falls.

D. To see the Zimbabwe Ruins.
30. What is bungee jumping?

A. A deep gorge.

B. A sport of jumping from a high place while tied to a rope around the

ankles.
C. Water sprays that looR%ke fire smoke rising in the sky.
D. The historic Victoria Falls Bridge.



--- Page 215 ---
el mm mn EE EE A —

31. Which statement is correct?
A. The Victoria Falls are the only heritage site in Zimbabwe.
B. The Zimbabwe Ruins are the only heritage site in Zimbabwe.
C. Besides the Victoria Falls, there are other heritage sites in Zimbabwe.
D. The Victoria Falls are only in Zambia.
32. What would you say about the heritage sites?
A. They must be destroyed.
B. People should not visit them.
C. They are for the tourists only.
D. They must be protected.

In numbers 33 - 35 choose the right pronoun to fill in the gap.

33. The cow fell into a big hole and broke leg.
A. their B. it's C. its D. my
34. Mother is here now; | can hear talking to father.
A. him B. she C. hers D. her
35. My sister and are going to the city during the holidays.
A. her B. | C. mine D. me
36. Most parents love children.
A. them B. they C. their D. theirs

Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

My sister Sarah and | started a small vegetable garden project. Everyday, we
worked very hard on the garden project and got a lot of tomatoes. We sold the
tomatoes to the women at the vegetable market and shared the money equally.

| wanted to go to the shops at once to look for something to buy but Sarah stopped
me. She said to me, “Tom, learn to use your money wisely. You do not buy just
because you have some money. You should only buy when you need something.
Have you thought of that?”

Sarah and | started talking about the wrong things some people do with their
money. Some people buy what they see other people buying. Other people
even borrow money and buy things they do not really need. Many children rush
to buy sweets, even when they do not have books to read and write in. There are
also some people who spend all their money and remain with nothing for more
important needs. rl

After this talk with Sarah, | bought a rain coat. This is the raincoat | put on when it is
raining and | need to go out. Sarah bought herself a satchel for carrying her school
books. Both of us kept part of the money, just in case we get more important
needs.


--- Page 216 ---
a

31. Which statement is correct?
A. The Victoria Falls are the only heritage site in Zimbabwe.
B. The Zimbabwe Ruins are the only heritage site in Zimbabwe.
C. Besides the Victoria Falls, there are other heritage sites in Zimbabwe.
D. The Victoria Falls are only in Zambia.
32. What would you say about the heritage sites?
A. They must be destroyed.
B. People should not visit them.
C. They are for the tourists only.
D. They must be protected.

In numbers 33 - 35 choose the right pronoun to fill in the gap.

33. The cow fell into a big hole and broke leg.
A. their B. it's C. its D. my
34. Mother is here now; | can hear talking to father.
A. him B. she C. hers D. her
35. My sister and are going to the city during the holidays.
A. her B. | C. mine D. me
36. Most parents love children.
A. them B. they C. their D. theirs

Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

My sister Sarah and | started a small vegetable garden project. Everyday, we
worked very hard on the garden project and got a lot of tomatoes. We sold the
tomatoes to the women at the vegetable market and shared the money equally.

wanted to go to the shops at once to look for something to buy but Sarah stopped
me. She said to me, “Tom, lean to use your money wisely. You do not buy just
because you have some money. You should only buy when you need something.
Have you thought of that?”

Sarah and | started talking about the wrong things some people do with their
money. Some people buy what they see other people buying. Other people
even borrow money and buy things they do not really need. Many children rush
to buy sweets, even when they do not have books to read and write in. There are
also some people who spend all their money and remain with nothing for more
important needs. 4

After this talk with Sarah, | bought a rain coat. This is the raincoat | put on when it is
raining and | need to go out. Sarah bought herself a satchel for carrying her school
books. Both of us kept part of the money, just in case we get more important
needs.


--- Page 217 ---
In numbers 37 -41 choose the answer from the passage.
37. Using money wisely means
A. buying whaf you see ofher people buying
B. selling tomatoes to the women at the vegetable market
C. rushing to buy sweets even when you do not have books to read
D. spending money only on what you really need
38. Sarah stopped his brother from
A. buying just because he had some money
B. growing more tomatoes to sell
C. buying what he really needed
D. buying a rain coat
39. By starting a vegetable garden project, Sarah and Tom are showing us that
A. they were very poor children
B. their mother was one of the women at the vegetable market
C. you can get money if you work hard
D. itis easy to start a vegetable garden project
40. From the passage above, we can say that Sarah was a

A. tall and smart girl B. wise and thoughtful girl
C. beautiful girl D. lazy and selfish girl
41. Who wrote this passage?
A. Sarah B. A woman C. Tom D. We do not know

In numbers 42 - 45 choose the right word to replace the underlined phrase.
42. Those two flowers are not the same.

A. similar B. beautiful C. different D. colourful.
43. My old grandfather could not go up the mountain.
A. jump B. move C. walk D. climb
44. | go to school in the morning and go back home in the afternoon.
A. retumn B. visit C. stay D. live
45. This dirty water is not safe to drink.
A. false B. unclean C. unsafe D. unable

In numbers 46 - 50 choose the right words to fill in the gaps.

46. Mother says that | cried a lot | was a baby.
A. how B. when C. where D. if
47. The clock was too slow, so | moved it .
A. upwards. B. towards C. forward D. backwards
48. My grandfather is now old that he cannot walk without a walking
stick.
A. too B. so C. very D. as
49. If you add sugar to the tea, you make it as as honey.
A. sweet B. hot C. soft D. clean.

50. Which sentence is written correctly?
A. did you see mr and mrs moyo yesterday
D. Did you see Mr and Mrs Moyo yesterday
C. Did you see mr and mrs Moyo yesterday?
D. Did you see Mr and Mrs Moyo yesterday?



--- Page 218 ---
Paper 2
Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Hlulani and Ngwazi

Everyday, people see Hlulani jogging up and down the narrow road. When he
jogs. he runs at a slow but steady speed. Hiulani says this jogging helps to keep
himself fit and strong.

Hiulani lives in Zoma Village. Zoma Village is separated from Gomo Village by a
deep stream. In the rainy season, this stream is always full of water. The people of
the two villages could not go across the stream. So they cut a thick tree stem and
laid it across the stream. The tree trunk became a very useful and busy log bridge.
Now, the villagers could go across the stream even when it was full of water.

One day Hlulani was jogging to Gomo Village. At the middle of the log bridge he
met Ngwazi.

Ngwazi was going in the opposite direction. Ngwazi always took a walk to Zoma
Village and back. He said that walk helped to keep himself fit and strong.

Hlulani and Ngwazi stood facing each other af the log bridge. There was no room
for both of them to pass at the same time. Hiulani said to Ngwazi, “Go back! Or
else | will push you into the deep stream.” Ngwazi answered, “Stop that. Let's
not fight. | have a plan. | shall lie down on the log so that you may walk over me.
So Ngwazi lay down on the log bridge. Hiulani walked lightly over Ngwazi. Then
Ngwazi got up and went on his way too.

(i) Answer these questions.

What is a stream?

What other name is used in the passage for a free trunk.

How did Hlulani keep himself fit and strong?

In which village did Hlulani live?

Why could the villagers not go across the stream in the rainy season?
How could the villagers now cross the sfream even in the rainy season?
In which village did Ngwazi live?

How did Ngwazi keep himself fit and strong?

. Where was Ngwazi going when he met Hlulani?

10. Between Hiulani and Ngwazi, who do you think was wiser?

11. Would you say Hlulani and Ngwazi were friends or were not friends?

(i) Choose ONLY ONE of the following topics and write about it.
1. Your friend wrote a letter to you inviting you to visit him/her during the
next weekend. But you cannot go on this visit.
In 8 — 12 lines, write a reply letter to your friend thanking him/her for the
invitation but telling him/her that you cannot visit. Give him/her the
reasons why you now can't visit.

2. Your class has visited a place of interest in your district. Places of interes?
can be:
the market, the river, the mountain, the town, the museum, the dam,
the forest, the police station, the post office, the bridge, the caves, ihe
plantation, the factory, and so on.

WOONONA WN =



--- Page 219 ---
—~

In 8 — 12 lines write about that visit under the heading: A visit to the

In 8 — 12 lines, write a letter to your elder brother/sister who is working
asking for an amount of money (state the amount of money that you
need). You would like fo use the money for a number of things.

In your letter, explain clearly how you want fo use the money. Also explain
why you need each one of those things that you want fo buy with the
money. Start your letter like this:
May | please ask you fo send me

(how much money, in words)

The council has built something that helps the people in your area.

In 8 — 12 lines write about if. Give your story a good heading.

Explain what the people were doing before it was built. Explain in what
ways the people are now better off.

Pictures tell us news.
Look at the three pictures below. They tell a story about what happened
recently.

In 8 — 12 lines, write the full story of what happened. Use real names of
people in the story. Give your story a good heading.


--- Page 220 ---
VenturesPrimary
English
Grade

Ventures Primary English Grade 3 Learner's Book has been developed fo support the
content, aims and objectives contained in the New Primary Education Curriculum for Zimbabwe.
It contains all the activities that the learners need to cover the English Language Syllabus for Grade 3.

The book features:
* Level-appropriate language and vocabulary.
* Integration of English Language with other subjects.
* Variation in concept layout and teaching-approaches to cater for individual learning
preferences and abilities.
* Aninter-disciplinary approach to the learning of English Language.
* A nationdlistic outlook.
Colourful level-appropriate illustrations that are supplementary to the content and concept they
intend to cover.
Inclusion of various language structures, compositions and phonics.
Instructions that are clearly explained before an assignment.
A reflection of modern ideas.
The use of ICT tools in teaching and learning.

The Learner's Book is part of the Junior Primary learner's Development
Series completed with a comprehensive Teacher's Guide.

8
college press |
. 9781779006851

BY co Ress TR RIN Aa 1 SRR Sm $V TD §
Approved by the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, January 2017 m or
Tw i i TRI Pes 1

FEL) ET ERE TSETT, la ; i Pe | A }
_= = So ea —— BT ea peda glo = T bi: Sa ey hy L305 be

mich



