--- Page 1 ---
i



--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primary
Agriculture

Learner’s Book

BA college press


--- Page 3 ---
renters Aprbouliare Grade 4 Learner's Bek
Venhurt Primary A peru shine

2 FM Sidhe
D (Muaraioos aed design College Press Pulishers (Pvt) Gad 2005

be regrixlaced, Moved wba petecval SYMeM, of eo eTHitted in any form ar by
henwis, without Ube prianwmniten permaiakon of the copyright holder ar it
inhbouring Raghts Act {Chapter 26:15), We. Failure 10 comply sub the
ght infringement anckus oivil claims for damages.

AdL rights reserved. Mo part af thas potdicatian may
ary muaanc, ¢lectrome:, pherbac ogling, repping, OF
accordance with che proanicele Of the Copstight and “de

tecma of this noce: may result mm legel actiod foe ogyT

First published 2079

Published ky
College Prees Publiabers (Pv1} Ltd
Pt). Bow 301, Harare, Zimbabwe

Typeset by College Prost in 12 pau Century Gepthic
Cover amege by Eaglesrala Funiar School and Tosh Phatapraghy
Dluetrotions by W,haudoucirwa ard BL Murch
Photos by Callege Pree Puhbishers: 7p? (3M pred di pbotor), 2M, 4 gl 5% pho}, Geach Loegen: pp. 2 (beet, 718, 27 acal 5*
phodeh, # (2 phate), 9 [righti, 13 (emp, 40. 32, HA 44,79 chef, al (1*, ze and 4 phaloy, 43,06, S501" phon), 56,20, 9-73, +h,
Mh, TH, BO, 84, F041, On, FG WO, tb, LOK, TCA, yt, 174116, [20.92, ERS: MacMille Suchives Collvctioa: pp. 2 (lerp, First
seven phowca, & (a4 photo, |B (eighty. Zisobakrwe Jape bare Stharw 2017: pF (right); Zumpepers: pp. 41 (34 phows), let

Printed by; DP prnimedia

ISBN: 97H-1-TS304b Nb G

WIP: 0223
Ackoowdedgemenh ; ~
The outhue and publahers ruuld Hike co acknowledge Getty hinages, Zimgery ened Nachle Archives Collection for
protographs ised
* * The pablishers have duide every effort to bast be cog helders. 1 toes

heave insdverinity overloitied amy. they will be pleaaed to moake che
DACESSATY ak OeTeT As wal Wee Gr oppo rharaty.

In ba egal in pholangpy any pege a0 Uhl: bom without =cilem permolidion froo the publishers.


--- Page 4 ---
Topic 1 iitete Daan eb ce 0 — eee eae cr
Unit 1 Inpatient cng one ee eaves ere nerearnarenarereaanes }
Unit 2 Basic fanm books... HUTCH tnd od ne con tevetntbetagninens bt ceteesescescessee seme seen eee &
Unit 3 Solfety i caggri: WU ee eteeccecee eee erence ec eeesensentenirtmniatir teases Db
Topic 2 Clive cond Pear U5 oe eae creer re rs ceeneen ereeauewsewsescaseenavearietecatanaaca 1?
Linit = 4 COUT one cece cece cce ccc cecet ce tecee te cbececeecteeecesee sececesceesensceeeseeeesenerepvecueceay 17
Unit 5 Natural forming regions OF Zima bye ec eeteesceatsseeareesrcrcaees 71
Tepic 3 Soil... seceecuedeedeate tenet eteaguesecdeenscaueasesnate tacts aa ueteetecceceesoecogeneetsctencecnener el
Unit 4 sail composition . DUPRUen ar pues doe cuan pe ce su aHUM SPU PRUE POOMU EE END Ede dt caked be that cece ce te eed eens 2?
Writ 7 So POTION, eee eres vec den deate ans eattuanceiasen ttesscesneesnsenseeeaeceneonpaseyeeess cB
Unit § SL TYPES ee ee ee ce cee cence ree cece tenet ae en ree tee cag gan Oe TET EIT EC Hee tt ee tean reat ete a4
Unit Schl TEE TTUN TR cs cass ceveseesecuercecuecucuucuunersuesuusstuysuravvedeettectessesseseesensenteeceeneneens ay
Unit 10 |= A] ere |B
Unit 11 SOW POUT ei cscesesssecnaneceeesscsensereseeaseureasiansesresaieieterictatecsced cota eetesee: 44
Unit 12 Ered of herr rv@ Css@55ent oo. ccc ce cece eee ceeeeene seep yceucenas 48,
Topic 4 Woler.. - a TE ee ESET. |
Unit 1a Water conservation... peuecus deeds ea trae pateasy Gitmene dina snanbet bathed ansendentd an tacces Ob
Unit ta Water OMG coco ctccc cose cteteceee eee, 5A
Le) e) Cee de 63
Unit 145 a ae) a | CD) | = re &3
Ta a i de de 66
Unit VF = ea | a dE a?
Urit 16 FRG UC bec caue cee yeen ceca cee ce eee ecee eo econ ce yee peu eas ee ere uimcuuaumsunavaviuivediestuauraaterese 75
Ltnit 19 ad ree Fd) | C= = 80
Unit 20 PUES TY veacecscecscecceueceseeee cece cone eeeceeeeece se aceuseecesecaneveuaueuiuavigivevicireatuauenarcees 4
Unit #1 Plearat CrP CHIGM aesscecasasesssescersseansueutaeatucteceteesenseseeeeceesecscruensueeseven: 70
Unit Ze End of term two GSS@8S ert oy ccc cseneeerseersrvavagerersceen 4
Topic 6 Aninrals........ suvueruuneenapearsececeuaeeseueeeeeacucueuseusteaner oimepssimsenseateateatcetenranetereres .101
Unit 23 Iitredue dior Po atrial SHY ee ccreecererrenserenerensare DDT
Unit 24 PACT PUTTITIOT ais eesescs ce cateesseneesecesusneuesenssavenausuedecenesicesedece sees cece eee ee 106
Linit 24 Srl IWGSOCK vec dena nea veatnentcniataatheticeseeeesosnsnenceeanqengeesy cururas .. |OF
Unit 26 PATOWS AIDES ogee cece cee ce nese en ene sce seeeceuveuscaneusataveusnaueasiuevassnategurantess 175
Topic 7 Foren inmapiberrves tts dred eC Hey oe ee ete ee teeta cece . 11*
Unit 27 FUT MUS DEES nee eee eee coe cee sees eeneenncetneaercneane sniavacincstesseesecteeesentese 119
ofa) Tree ge) 2 ee ee ee ..- 124
Urit 2B AQHEUSINGSS ... levee ee BT
Urit 2? End of year assessment... en 133


--- Page 5 ---
Introduction to agriculture

Unit 1 Importance of agriculture

1. narmne the branches of agriculture
7 descibe the activities involved in each branch,

Hashbock a i

In Qrade five, you learnt obout Ihe imponance of agneultyre to thea community
rand the nation. You should be able to explain the importance of agriculture at
“cammunity and national level. In groups ciecuss the |jneotance of agdcultura,

. eo —— a ee eS ee. res

Oat

. Key words

| erganic matter econernist

Branches of agriculture

The main branches of agriculture are:
crop production

qnimal produetioan

soil science

agricultural engineering
Agricultural econernics
homcultuine

forestry and wildlife

** F-; @ F & *

Crop production

Crop production is a branch that focuses on the growing of crops. The ain of this
branch i§ fo have beller food production. it inchudes the growing of annual crops
like maize, beans, fice. watermelons and perennial crops fike lea, sugarcane,
fametees and potatoes. Some of these crops can also be grown for commercial
value, We call these cash crops. These crops include cotton, lobocce, suntiower
and sugarcane. Figure |) shows examples of cash crops,



--- Page 6 ---
Figurel.1 Cash crops

Animal production

Animal production is a branch that deal with the reanng of animals, It plays an
important ale infood production and income generation. This brarmchis concerned
with meat, dairy and égq3. Examples of animal products include:

cattle farming -
pig farming -
gool faring

poultry farming = -
Ash faaming -
sheep forming — -

Figure 1.2 Brailar farming

oc. ar
- Fe

beet. rnilk

park

goat mect

eggs, chicken meat, rabbit mest -
fish

mutton

—"



--- Page 7 ---
Agrcultural engineering

Acricuitural enginesing § 4 branch that i wivelved will fare machines, tac
and structures. Agrinulivral enupeneenny. as shown in Figure 1.5 and 1.4. provides
gery ces on implements used cor ploughing, harrowing, clanting and nervesting,.
The cami ef this Franch & le eripioee Ihe effectyveness and sustainability of herr
DHS,

Flowie 1d frachor drawing o disc plowgh Tigure 71.4 Combine tormesler

‘Activity 1 individual work

1. Nome other farming machrrniesy tat yoo have seen besides that shown in
Figure id dared 1.4,
(27) Gee the uses ob tne machines you marmned it 1.

“ -

Soil science

Soi science & o branch thal focuses majendy on ibe slrociwre ond comoonoents of
Ihe sca. The aim of th’s Branch is improving soil candibers in orcer to increase crops
production. So) sence helps tras in sSlect corec: crops fer didferernit sol.
Fer e@normplo, end.ze orowes well in sanady-iarn sais Hat are righ in crqewic ratte,
whie ‘oodcce prefers sancy sok, Organic matter is decaying plant end anime
oatecal Nurieinircs con be added Io sol Through fertilisers. Soi science helps te
determine hens sudahle tor dittergmt tyecs ot soil

Agricultural economics

Acicultural economics & a ora thal is cancernec with ihe business sicke ce
agncultuse. The ain of this Branch is to onsure that aaricullLral processes aes
cenciicted profitably. Econamist oré people wino neip formers ia pian their
frances and keep records of income arc expenditure, Tris branch gives farrnets
acvice on crops lo grow ane how lo make ther orofiable.



--- Page 8 ---
‘Topic: Sl Science more imortarit than Agiculbural Sone cs,

Divide yourselves into teen groups. One group suppers the Halerment sriile the
ether opposes it. Prosant your ooints tar your sicke and have your teacher score
you and deternnige the sirinireg side.

4orticulfure

soriculture & oO branch that tecuses on the grewing of gcrden crops. fsarden
crops include vegetables, fruns. all decorative plants like flowers and plants Ihat
provide spices and medicines. The aim of this branchis to ensure sustainable ond
profitable preductharn of garden craps, Examples of naticultural products mclide:

Fronds - oranges, borandas. apples and Grapes

Yogetobles - qreen, red and yellow peppers. tomatoes,
carats, cauliflower and broccoli

Five's - roses conned des

4ers - mint, mcaemacy cine thyme

Forestry and veldife 6 a branch that seeks te manage forested and wildlile
msources for the benefit al humon Beings. The iilerest af his Grarncch rs ie anirrvals;
how to protect tern and thew heatiterts.

Answer ihe questions below.

Mr Muza Grew a hectare of maize and a hectare of Grannis last yeor. Ae scilel
the moize to ihe Grain Marketing Bod'd (GMB) and made a profit ot $500.00. He -
ake sald the ground iit ane mace a prokt of $730.00.

1, Which crop gave Mr MuUzo nmnore prohit? [1]

2) Hew myed more craht cid he make framtoe crop on 17

3. Which crop would you advise him to grow ir the next secqsorn?

4. Why would you advise hin 1a chacse that crop?

S. Give a disadvantage af nat growing maire io the howseholcd. [3]

Activity 3 Educational our
Arrange an educational tow to a commercial farm in your aren,
identity tae agicuttural branch the farn belongs Me.

Ask questions or hic. thi fam is run aad how they make thir profit.
Ase questions on cvawhy ihe soecilic Groarich wos chosen,

moe =



--- Page 9 ---
Exercise B |
| fable 11 shows branches of agriculture. Fillia the actvities of each branch and

Ors Pe ouesteoms thiol foley.

Table 1.1 Bane hes of ooricultire

1.

i

Crop production boceuuunvetseseesers

Animal production

Soil science

Agicultural engineering

Agiculturaleconarnigs

CC |

Forestry and Wide

[7} |

Wich branch of agriculture Mmelps farmers tes reduce better maize i
yields? [1| |
Whit branch of agriculture is responsible for Hllage ef kond? fy
Name any two herticultural products. , i]
Deiine the term "cash crop’, [1]
Whatis iho role of the forestry and wildlile brancn? [2

eeaeaererer—

SUMING y

« The branches of aoriculturé are imoorant because they Nelo farmers to
ITprove clap. livestock praduction arc protect animens and their habitats.

* TNs crop production branch caries aur resecrch on crop improvement,

~ The onimel production branch provides service: on livestock health and
Mmprovernennt.

*  Soilscience provides infonmation on seul structure and muiritien.

© TRE agriecuilural economics branch provides Thancial sSrigces and advice on
Crop pre fiteroility.

* Horicuiture focuses on garden craps such as vegetobies, fuits arid herds,

* Foredry and wildlife ans to protect forestry resources, onimals and their ricahurzi
haketcats,


--- Page 10 ---
a
Unit 2 Basic farm tools

—,- ——-

|. state different ways af mamntaining far tools
Io. list characteristics of good storage Facilities for farrn tools
a. model a farm toal rack.

“In ihe last grade you learnt about how te classify tools according to their se.

Think of the diferent form toals and in groups chassify Then aecording fo cheer .
ee

; Key words 7 -

coat cert

ke - —_—_ —-— --. —_—_ ————_

After using farm tools, we usually wash then and cry ther before storage, At
times we codt the toals wih paint to prevent rusting. To coat fa cover with a
lover ol something. When toos are looked afler properly, they usually last longer.

Maintenance of farm fools

Form toals hele to make work easier and efectva. They came in different shapes
and sizes to perferm various tasks. [he folowing a6 reasons why itis impoarhant to
maintain far Wools:

1. For hem be last longer.

3 Jools that are maintained work efficiently.

3 foreduce the risk of injury to the operator.

4 Regula maintenance helps to reduce mainienance Coss.

The following are woys of maintaining farm tooals:

1. Weshand dry tools otter use,

4, Sharpening before use reduces the amount of force you need ta
gpply when warking. Blunt tools fend to break while they are being Used.

4. Greosing and olling metal parts that rb against each other preverts friction,
Abe oiling the movable parks makes the toel easy yo work with.

4. Ensure that wooden por aré keot dry and strong. Woret. they should be
replaced.

5. Keep metal ports clean and diy and pain! them ta qaveid rusting.


--- Page 11 ---
_

madden “oals should chvays be hanged becouse leaving them on the floc
Can Cause ip lry when @ pérsean steps on them. Leaving them on the floor mery
obo expoie them to moisture which causes rust.

some fools come in specio: packaging to keep ‘hen protected. such talk
sheuld alvays be packed back to their original case.

Tole 2.7 Summary of maintenance of Lorem foals

ES

1,

Z.

4.

2.

Or-plowgh + ploughing large pieces = wash after use
eat land * cool with oi te preven
: rust
hearrenay * Breaking soul lures * woh after use

= removing weeds * Bait te prevent cust
levelling Tre sci

* digging * wash offer use
* weeding = sharpen edge
regularly
spade * digging * WOSK after use
*  Ieading rmcobericds e Coot with Sil to
revert nus
I
sprayer 4 Spraying ta coniral " owosh olter use
disecies and pesk » clean nozzle bo
prevent
blockoge


--- Page 12 ---
6. Figen pepe

hand fork

& garden line

Po wotenny can

10, rake

Answer the questions below. .
1. Which tool is used fer ploughing large pieces of lend?

A. Goraen fark
2, Tocls are cogied with paint so tial Mey do not

Fs.

rust

* wadtonng

= burg sail
* aerating soil- to .
oerate is to allow air
inte sore hire
« lifting grass ard
stover
= rmatking straight lines = =

« woleéring scedbeds ‘

© breaking lumps of sal +
# fovelling Soil
- ramoving weeds

B. Spade

B. Break

coll after use
cleon sprinkier

wish otter Wse
straighten prangs

clean after use
Ory in fhe sun
reall on Begs

wash after Use
clean rose to prevent
block e

Cleon after use
shaighiern pvands

C. Os-plovgh DD. Rake

C. wear tast

DO, harm werkers


--- Page 13 ---
[a Whatis done to make o hoc work effectively?

|

| 4. Raplace the hoe B Waoter soil |
| &. Change the sei tyoe CG. Sharpen the hore |!
|* Which of the following tools should be cleaned to prevent blockage? ;

4, Hedge shears B. Sproyer . Sickle D. Hose-pipe =:
| 5. Whitshis the odd one out?
ij 4. §prayer Bo Hose-pipe L. Waleing can G. Bucket
66. (Give Iwo reasons for maintaining tools, Elf:
I? Why shoul tool be hung at all tines? [1|
| 8, What is the reason for oiling and greasing tools requiarly? [1]:
(2. Why should wooden parts of tools 96 kept dry? [i],
| 10,How does rust affect tools? [Wi

————_—_— ee —- ——————

Siorage of farm tools

All fools shoud be sheltered to prevent wear and tecr. Too should be shalterec
ina storeroom. A storeroor is a room set aside for storage of toels winder lock and
key. ¥orying storage units can be built for d¥Ferent foods. Storage units are built to
argenmse tools. The following are proper storage un‘ts for form tools.

ioolrack

A Toobrack a3 showe in Figure 2.1 is used to hold teals like haes, picks, shovels.
mattocks. spades, axes. rakes and garden forks. A toolrack is used to store tools in
SUCK oowdy [hal they are ecsy to recognise, get and return.

Tool board

Hand tools ore kept on o teal boord shawn in Figure 2.2, Examples of honed boos
Include hammers. plies, wood saws, cutting toos, drilling tock and scrawednvers,
Tool boards are vsed to hang hand Moels se ther they are sake and easy to find
wh Peed ed,

| ”

Figure 2.1 Tol «rack Figule 22 Toa] boord


--- Page 14 ---
I]. In groups design a model of a teal rack.
-9) Identify the toals you woule want fo stere On your hool rock.
| 3. Identify the materials you will née to uid the tocl rack,
4, With ihe he p of your teacoe Build ie lool reac.
5. Groups loke turns io prasent thei taal rock ta the class.

Tool shed

4& tool shed. shigevn in Figure 2.2,
is a separate structure used For
stoning larger farm equipment ‘ike
ainusx-plough, dike plough, ric" ors,
spikoharow, awrrawer, culleotoy.
wheelsaray, planter ox yoTk,
sprayer. bow saw. hose- pI and
Ox-Cort.

Figure 2.4 Tool shed

Designing and keeping inventory of farm tools

Fam ‘ool ore very important. Without torm toels there would be no QQiculture,
Teos, however, can easily be lost or mishlaced it they are not taken care of
property, There is need te keen inventory of farm tool. An inventory 8 a record
of fhe available farm tools. if is a list that records the tclol number of tools, [he
tools Ihat were issued oul and the too's that were brought back and ta whom. In
today's world, all this information can be computerised to be manageable.

Identifying tools

Wher tock are properly stored, ihey carl be easy fo mecintain. Proper slercge
micikes it ensy fo identify tools. The follawang lecnniques may assist a farmer in

identifying the tects.

Numbering

Teols are marked using oil agin with aumbbers which ore the same cs numbers on
ihe tool rack, For example, when hee number seven hes not feen returned, the

number seven on the rack willrennan enpty.


--- Page 15 ---
~

Using colour codes an tools

Colours one used Io identify storage space fora set of touls. spades can be brown
and should be placed whee ihe brown caiour is in the shorage space, Other tools
can have diferent colours to mark where they should be stared, Tools, therefore,

are nat miked when in storace.

Activity 2 Practical

Cesign an inventory record for yourschool. You can use a computer bo {ull this
task ‘You can copy the table below or be croctive and moke your own,
Inventory record
“Created Dy. cc ccc cece cceceeyeenecanens Date
Sheet number... eee teen eee |

Ted number | Deserfption Lecation

Hoe oF reo

Black, wooden Storeraam: §
Ran ale Fool rack

Characteristics of good sterage Facilities
security

Tools ore expensive and ihey shoud be stored in a secure sterercom. The cocr
should be slong and kept under dock ond key, Tight security is needed to onsure
thai farm teal: are safe from theft, Replacing stolen farn tools con be very
expensive.

footed storercam

To avoid damage by weather elements such os rain, tools should be Reot under cy
roof, Tools exposed to meisture or rain develop rust. Rusby tools usually do mot work
properly and they break on the affected arc. Rusty hoes, for example, became
Blunt and cannal pertoon tasks effectively.

Yentilation

Ventilation & a very imiporlant factor when considering taal storage. Sometimes
fools are returned ina the siareroam not completely dry after being washed. Wf the
stoweroom i nol propery ventilated, thé moisture oan the tools will cause the fol:
te rust. Toots with wooden hundies may aka rol when exposed to a tot of moisture.
The handles will dhen weaken and break easily,


--- Page 16 ---
Exercise B

| Answer ihe questions below.
|. Tools should be she'tered ta

4. prevent wear and tec B. keep them warn

C. prevent them frar working well CD. allow tPett
o Which teolis rol eopt on ¢ taal rack?

AL doe B. Spade © Pick Db. Lownmower
4. Where are larger farm tools like planters kept?

A. Toolrack B. Tool board ©. Taol shed 0. Outside
4. Select o metnod cf identifying garden toch.

A. Co.cur codes B. Tool rake €. Toolshed C. Tocl boord
5. Which one isa cnaracternstic of a good sto-age Facility for far foals?

A. Moisture & Yentilolion C, Darkrvess C. Colour
4. Where gre hoes arranged ina storeraorn? 1]
7 Listory four equipment stored in the toot shed. [4]
a. Whot happens when lols ore left in the rain? [k]
#. How is numbering wed when sterng farm tools? [*]
10 How is mixing af hoals in the storeroom Gvaided? [1]
11. State any one safety precaution observed when Wsirigy Piess. [1]
Summary

+ Form toal rrairtenance helps toa make tools last longer and work efficiently.
» Weshing and crying tools afher use, greasing ond ailing metal pads and
maining dre seme ways O° maintaining fools.

Good storage facilites:

© Prevent rain irom wetting the lols

* Prevent rusting of 1001

+ Ensure oaintis not damaged by the sud and rain
+ Ensure grecese and oll are not washed away

* Enégure tools are kept sate fron thieves

© Ereure that missing tools are easily idennted

* Hep tosave lime wren selecting tools for use.


--- Page 17 ---
Unit 3 Safety in agriculture

lL. desonhe cofe ways af handing agrochernicals.

——-

Inthe previews qade youleaml! about the safe use of farm toals and implements.
Discuss sale woys of managing @ slorerceom, safe woys of collecting and
hardhrig 14a §.

Key words

agrochemicals TOXIC

Agrochemical are chenicel produch used in cgnicullure. These chemicals
Mclude pesticides, herhicides and imecticides. The we of aqrchormical Fras
Orn rapidiy a8 farms Wove become big in size and ire challenge of keepiig
crops and animals (re@2 ‘roar damage fas increased. Most of the ogrochemicals
used by fammers ace toxic and they should be handled caretully. Texke mecrs
haratul. [his important lo follow pecoutions ort fre lobelk ta avoid cousing harm
lo peooe and ihe enviranment Some of the preceubions are:

Store cnemicak away from foodstutts

ceep chemicals away fram sources of drinking water

Keep chémicals Geyay for the reacn of chi dren

Store chemicals in locked shorercoom

Wear protective chathing

Do not spray chemicals on windy cays

Read and understand the instructions on Ine laoel before applying the
chemical

A. Use arespirotor ia avoid inhaling f.mes

9. Ensure sore disensal of agrochemcal containers

1. Dea notremovwe lobels tram containers

11. Mim cherricals carcacthy

12, Wash hands after handling agocherricais.

Colour codes of agrochemicals

“a Oh in Be oe ho

There cre four colour coces which ot used fo indicate the strength of the poison
cantained in aareache nical. The colou! todes Cammany uted are green, orancie,
red and Gurale. Table 3.1 shows colour codes and the strength ot the poison they

renee.


--- Page 18 ---
Table 3.1 Colour codes ol agrachenle ols

Colour code Strength of polscn

ip

Figure 3.1 Agrechemieals colour codes

Effects of poor handling of agrochemicals

Agrochemical shauld aloys be hondled wilh care. Poor handling of
agrochemicals can have odangercueetection peacle's healthoand erviroriment.
Chemicals that are very toxic are abo very dangerous even in small amounts. The
poor handing Gf pesbcides arises fram excessive iage, nob weorng appropriate
protective clothing and poor storage.

Health effects

There i need la wear appropiate protective ciothing when handling ar working
with agrechemicals. The consequences of posening: can range frorn real
ritaherns fo deoth, The main routes af absorption of these qorechemicals are
FrroQuign respiration, skin and dgeston The *allowing are some health problerns
agsoaciated with the poor use of agrochemicals:

me oltchy skin

= Eye jritatien

* Stomach discenfort

4 Hecdaches

» Chest pan

«Difficulties in Grecathirg.

Environmental effects

The poor hendling of agrechenicals nas 1égatee |tfecis on Ihe @nyvirgomarit,
The following are the elects of agrachemicals on the erviroiment:

*  Weoher pollution tran murat

¢ $c cottamination from leechirg


--- Page 19 ---
4

Air pollution From specry crift
Disturbances to ecosystems

Water runoff caries agrachamical into woler bodies ar aqualc environments
while wind can carry trem te other fields, grazing areas and human setthemants
porentially affecting other species, The poor handling of agrachemicals has a
negohve eflect on ecomyslems a4 some plants and animals moy die due to
expcture ta fiese chemicals.

Summary

SS gwewew_ewwcwweeeeweeeweTreee—

Agochemcak ae cherrical product used in agriculture. These chemiccls
Molde pesticides, herbicides and insecticides.

itis important to follow nstruchons and precautions on the lobe to aveid
causing har to people and the enviranrmern.

The colour codes for agnochermibcals cre:

fareean - slightly taxc
Change/Amber moderately trac
Red - highihy bax
Parle - extremely toxic

Inere is need lo wear appropriate pretectve clothing when handling or
working wih agrecnemcoal. Poor handling at agrochemicals can lead to
Poser.

iGlossa ry
Crgenkc = ndtural without any chemicals added.
! Branch - Ba cermponent of somethirg tral is larger.
Coal - Iocover, ,
; Stamping - OB Marking oF engraving an okyect veng die ar an ink Glock.
inventory - 6 Glist of owned stock.
Agrchemicals — are chemcai products that are used in agriculture.
Pesticides — are chem cals used 1a kill and control pests.
Herbicides - fre chemicals used to kill or prevent the growth of
unwanted Blanis. Thay are Geo ences os weedc-killers,
insecticides dre chemicals wed to kl and control problematic
Wise ts.
Toxic -  porsoangus,
*



--- Page 20 ---
End-of topic assessment

Multiple choice

Choose the conect answer,
1 Agncullure $a XL.

A secondcry achvity Bo tertiary cethiviky
Crimean cc tryity DO. simple oc‘iity
2 Which are of these agrcullLral tools needs greasing?
A. Sprayer BR. Wheelborow . Bow sow D, Hammer
4. Select ane characlershe of a gaod starage facility fer Far 1008.
A Solow B. Tecl rake © VYerntiotien DBD, Woter
4. The cultivation of vegetables. fruits and flowers is celled
A. Rodeculture B. animal producion
©. forestry Do engineering
63. The colour code purple indicates that the chemicalis_
AL DONOraUs B. Faorrntul if svalloered
i ©, sate CD. extremely powonaus
6 Which is the main acthvily in crop production?
A CSTW oops Bo lmigetian
i , Keeping broilers BE. Training forrrers
'? The branch “hat focuses on managing terest: anc widlife resources 1s
collet.
4. forestry and wildlife B. soil scence
Cc. agnicullural engineenng CG. horticulture

°B Choose ane FALSE slalement about orecautianary mecdsures lakern wert
handling agrache micas.

4. Keep chemicals away fom Ihe reach of children.

B. Store chemicais ina locked storeraom.

Cc. Fot when handing agrechemicals.

i LD. Weer protective clothing.

2) What washes agrachomicals into walter badies Caueng water palluhorn?

AL Wid BA. Aqinmals C. Sumignt O. Run off voter
10. Where are lorger far tools ike planters kept?
A, Tool rack B, Toolshed ©. Toolboad DF. Outside

Structured questions
Answer all questions in full.

1. Describe Ihe activities O° any three agicunural branches. [es]
2. Slate any three meiheds of maintaining farm tools, ('3]
4. Describe any ive effects af poor handling cf agrechenicals. j5]
4, Describe any three characterislics af a good far too: storage Facilily, i]
5. Why is itimportaed to hove a tool inventory? [it


--- Page 21 ---
Unit 4 Climate

1. define elraate

|? ditingush bebweer weather and climate,

Init unityou wit: i |

In tne last grade yeu lean about weather. In qroups define wealher, lis a
different vwaeatocr elements thal youremember, the inslruments used te mesure:
these alarmends and the inflvences ot weather on climate,

em me me mG

Key words |

Purrncdity glebal warning

Weather and climate

Weather

Weather: is delined as the state of the aimosphere at any given pkace and time.
Weather & corstantly changing. Weather focuses on the day te day changes in
rainfall, temperate, Cloud cover, aind and humidity. All these elements influence
agricultural activites ditferently,

Temperature: ic the measure of the hotness or coldness of the atmosphere,
Tompercture i measured using the maximum and minimurn therrmnearneter. This
Iheanrnometer measures the highest and lowest temperdivres on any given dey,
Tempercturé ddHenrnine: the type of crops grown per secon. Craps lke orion,
cobboge and wheat are grown in winter becouse these crops prefer lower
TemBerctures. SUMMED Crops inchs maze. beans and cucuinbers.

ip


--- Page 22 ---
Wind: 3s moveg ar The insurer! usec to measure wing speed is called Ihe cup
onemometer ard the instrument used lo cetermine wind diecton & called a wind
Wane. In agicuivre wind act as an cgent cf pollination ard cloud fommatan, Wind
potters differ acceding to area ond time of yeor. this infliserces agiculral activites.

Rainfall: is Ihe amount of presitation that falls ab ary green areca and 6 Usually
misasured using) sain gauge. Raiifallis the majorinfluence of agricultural activiess.
This ib Hecowse craps mecd water to grow. Rocnfail pattems differ accerding to
dreds or reginns Same areas receive more rainfall while others receive vory tittle
iaiall. Tae arnount of rainfall determine: the typo of crops grown.

Humidity: is the arnount of water vapour or TiGisture in ihe atmosphere cried if 1
measured using a hygrometer When the oi is dry it means me sture is very la.
Air monte 5 wceded lo reducc the rate of transpralien avoiding the wilting of
planks.

Cloud cover is the extent at which the sky is covered by clowds. Clouds help
ta contol tempentyre oy fonng and releasing heat energy in the atmosphere.
Figure 4.1 and 4.2 show cifferenl exlents of cloud caver,

Figure 4.1 4 clavdy raing-doy Figure 4.2 Sunny Andy

Climate

Climate is the overage of ohservctions and mecsuremerts of everyday weather
recards jaken avera very long pened of time cf aoeaut 30 years. [ris measured
by drahsing ihe weather potherns such as temperature, rcinfall. clowd cover.
humidity and wind of aa ared ever along period ch iirme. The world 5 curently
gang threngh climatic change. This $a change in rogiona and global climate
palte ns. These changes are brought about by global warrnirig. Global warming is
along term ie of the atmospheric temperatures. This results in changes in rainiall
palte ns. crayghts ard Meaels,

The climatic conditions of an area a‘fect the classificatiar ot seasons. In Zimbobwe
there are foor didinat seasons nanely nin rain, post rain, dy and cold, and hot
and dry. lable 4.1 shows tbe weather conditions and the agricultural activities that

take Glace in each secear,


--- Page 23 ---
Toble 4.1 Weother conditions and aqucultueal acliviies per season

season [Temperature [Rateroll  Yaciaty

Main rain High High Farmers ore ploughing.
plonting and weeding

Pasgk rain Medcdiury Low Crops hove matured and
haveing lakes place

Bry and Low Low Marketing of harnested

cold crops and Growing winter

craps under srigation

Hob and dry High Ne raintcall Land preparation. buying
fartibers and seeds

Distinguishing between weather and climate

The difference betewcon weather and climate isin the mocasure of Fie. Weather
is the state of the olmosphere at any gven place and lime. Weather is constantly
chongng andis over ashen peiod cf time [it i meqsured daily, Climate is the
avenge of observations and measurements of everday weather records token
overa very long perad of line of about 30 years. Tabie 4.7 datingquishes between
weather and climate,

Table 4.2 Oifference: between weds ged cliente

[a

Daily changes in temperature, clavd Armved at after analysing weather re-
cover ranial, wind and hurmicity. Cords fear 3 yews.

Can change very quickly during ihe Takes mary yecors la change,
day.
Wegthar changes oftect limredanrneas, Climatic changes afect longer areas.

Activity 1 Educationcl tour po )

Arrange a visit toa wealher station near you,

vt.
“2. List the instruments 16 be seer.
4. Prepare questians an weaiher and climate.
4. Prepore questans on weather instromerits.
5. Secure a held notebook forrecarding information,
we

a


--- Page 24 ---
we iN

Answer the questions below.
1.

Which one of the tollawing is neban element of weather?

4. Tempe ature B, Humidity

©. Rainfall CD. Atriasphiere

The amount of water vapour in the otmiosphers is Encwr cs
4, rainfall B, wired

co. é@voporatian GO. humidily

List any hwo differences between climate and weaiher.
Sivo ony two good effects of wind an agriculture.
Exp ain how global warning attests climate.

Summary

-

——————————

Wiondther is delmed 15 thre state of the atmogehere ot ony giean peace arid

ne.

Climate is the Qverige ct abservations and moasurements of overdary
weather recards jaken over a very long penod of time of about 30 years.

a


--- Page 25 ---
Unit $ Natural farming regions of Zimbabwe

1. identify natural faring regians of Zimbabwe
2. Stote climate cond tiens of each faring region.

i

——e—e—ee instrument is Used te measure rainfall recenwec?

-- one

Key words
L Intensive specialised

fimboabwe is divided inko five agricultural farming recians, These farming regions
are Clasufied based on tompcratur:. rainfall, soil quality and vegetation. The
aqnicultural actreihes ciffer fron region io regan depending on the clirreatic
Tonditions. same dreds receive a lot of raintall while other cieas receive very little
rainfall, The map below shows natural farming regions in Zimbabwe fromm region
core bea Aye,

N

Key

po Requer |

Reaqucirh 4

-_ Recon }

Figure 5.1 Nolunal fanming régions in limbabwe



--- Page 26 ---
Activity 1 Practical [ae

1. Shucky the map in qrowps.
2, Discuss Ine agricultural activ ties that take place in cach region.
3) Draw a map el Zimbabwe and colour the five maha farrring regions.
Lise a different colour far each region.
4. Label the mus. the mean tarming activities cared aut in each regen as!
follies:
Region 1ispecialised farming
Region 2: intensive farnirg
Region 3: sertintensive farming
| Region 4: semiextensive farming
1) Region S: extensive farming ,

Activity 2 Educational tour aa

|]. Go around yer cermurity ora nearoy fan.

(3 Observe the tyae of agriculture taking place. ;

3. Record your results and determine the farming region.
A Repo back ta the whole class. }

a

Table 4 | Cifferent characterish|es 4 ite notueal forming region: in fimbubwe

Region |Arecsinthe | Average Average Agricultural activities

region annual onnval
rainfall temperatures

| Eastern Over }0G0mm Less than Suitable for specialised
Highlands | i fone kind} cmd
GChimanimani, High tainfall Cool diversified farming.
nyengs / temperatures Maize. beef and dairy
Chipinge produc tign.

Tropicol crops-ted and
coffe,

Fruits-Bbananas and
dOpples.

Horthcultural craps
motdtoes, Recs and
other vegetables.

a


--- Page 27 ---
Northen
Highlands and
Middle veld
(SUILve,
Marandern.
Harare,

Rust fae,

HAY UPYL,
Cheguty and
Neorhan

Esigadini.
Cw eri,
Ryveskye:,
Shai,
Mutoke and
Buvherd

Bulocay eo,
Mkayi, Gwayi.
Lupane ard
Cavan

7 40nninn-
10m

Felohle
rgintell

aD mr-
7 rrim

Average
rainfall

4450 mmi=
430ranm
Low rainfalk
Ciccasoncdl
droughts

(Clold wittteis
14°- | BS

WTA

summers
18-2257

Hor
12-2450

Very Fagh

temperatures

20R-25°C

Swit for intensive
{requiring a2 lat of
money and latcurh
harming.

Crop product=sn-maize.
soybeans, tobocce,
sorghum. groundnyts.
cotten ond wheat,

Livestock production-
beel, dairy, pig and
ou try.

Suitable for serri-
Inrensive livestock
Rona.

Drought resistant crops.
groundnuts, sorte,
aotton, iunflower.
tabacce and saya
Beans,

Imgatior i practiced.

Livestock productian-
beel production.

suitable far semi-
Batensive farmind.

Irigation is prachiced.

Drought resistant crops-
maize. sorghum and
millet.

Livestock producton-
Cattle ranching and
wildlife.


--- Page 28 ---
in

Lowyeld Below 450min Very ign Suitable for extensive
temperatures farnnirg,

abe Wery baw . A
Nweneel rental ower SON Limited agricultural
Chirecai and achyviky- drought
Thealotsho resistant rcs rest,

mgarian 1 prac ced.

Forestry, wildlife and
calle produchorn

Answer the questions below,

| 1. Hea many forming regions arc there in Zimbabwe? if |

| &  Moame ory haa of the forrning regia, [2 |

la Describe the ogc tural activites thai take ploce in the regians stated in

question 2. [2]

4. Whatis the differance between speciaised and inteasve tanning? [Z|

1S. Give ong cvample of.o p oce located in each of the following regions:

al Region 1 be Region 3 e| Region § [2]

Summary

+

Timbobwe if divided into five agriculture farming regions veich are Region 1.
Region 2. Region 3, Region 4 and Region 5. The regians are clossited based
on lemperature and rainfall recerved,

Region | lies in tie ecst of ‘he country aed recewes more than 1000rm at
rainfall. and specioised farming i¢ commonly cractsed. The areasin this regasn
are Chipings, Nyanga, Chimanimarni and Cashel,

Region 2.05 min-north af the courtry and receives ?S0rmrn-1O00nm of eaintal
annual which is suitable fo crop and animal production. [he ares in tris
regioninclude Karare. Gurive and Maroncderc.

Regior 3 [es in the middle totitude cf the country and receives S00rmm-
7S0rim ef roinfall aaovally, and intersivé and specialsed farming ere com
monty practised. The areas ir this region are Esigedin, Gweru, Kwekwe,
Sharmva, Muloko ond Buherd.

Region 4 cover tow-hing orecds noth and sulk of Ihe counitg and receives
dsdeam-é50rn of tanfal annwely. and semi-extensive farming is parcaciiseed
The oreds in this region or Bulawayo, Nkay, Lupane and Gwanda.

Region S encompasses low-lying arecs of the country and receives raintall
below 450mm pe year Cattle ond wildite production are practiced while
drought esiant craas are grown under irigation, The arcas in this region ore
Beilbredge, Maeneée, Chred2zi and Tahalals.



--- Page 29 ---
=m

Glossary

the atmosphere,

Intensive farming - BB Te use of high iavels of inpit (money, labour,

machinery) to get high levels of autouls [ogricullureal
roducds).

Speciclised farming - is focusing on one type of agricultural production.

Extensive farming - is the us@ of smallingui on small pieces ol jand.

Global warming - bs the long-téermirise of the atmospheric temperdivres.
Region - isan area,

Ma,

— | End of topic assessment ce

_
Humidity - 8 te amount of moissure or weer vapour present in
|
I
I
I

ae

Multiple choice
hoose the comect answer.
A, isan instrument usid to mecsure wind speeq,
4, CUP anemoneter B. rain que
C. thenrnane ter D. wind vane
Tre coldes! scasen with no rainfallin Zimboowe 5 called = _
A wos] air B. mczin rain C. hotanddar BP. dry and cele
Why is weather and climate change rnportant te the fanner?t Farmers ;
A. uy ihe ight type of clothes
B. oe ahle te plan ther agncultural geterties
TZ, know when to go on holigay
D. know when to slaughter their cattle for food
During tie het and dry s@asen, farmers in Zimbabwe ane _.
A. plonting ard harvesting
B. oan holiday
. preparing forthe faring activities of the oest season
D. planting winter crops
How much rainkail 6 recened im Regigr 1
4. More than 1O%Orom, BA. Wery litle rainfall,
fC. 1ess than 750ren. D. Between 450i and 450mm.
What is the main farming acthity practiced in Regicn 47
4. Croc production B. Fores ting
C. Livestock and wildlife D. Pouliyy production
Which city is in Region 2?
4. Bulowoyo B. wer ©. Hoarers D, Mutere
Which of the *ollowing is noto weather element?
A. Temperature B. Autumn ©. Rurracity D, Cloud tover

a

ae

I

a


--- Page 30 ---
—— ee “s,

‘9 Humidaiis 2 _

AL dy 6, moisl Co dusty GD, cold
10. Whal type of terringis practices in Region 4?
A. Imensive B.Semni-nterntivé ©. Cxtersve BP. Specialised

Structured questions

Answer all the questions in full.
1. Explain feo elements of wecther and tow they affect agricultural

cclivities. [4]
‘3 Whatis the difference bélween weather and climate? [2]
4 Which heo main weather elements are used to clagsify Zirmbobeye iy

farming reqons? [?| |

Same the recon lobelled A toa &. [3]
Describe “he agricultural ocivities of natural tarming rogien 1. el

1 fn



--- Page 31 ---
T
i

F el
Tae

cpt
3

Unit 6 Soil composition

(1. state the Functions of soil components.

lp the previous ‘evel, you learn! that soil is composed of organic and inorganic
matter. In grows discuss the dirtcrances behbveen organic andincrganic matter.
I Sole inorganic mineral matter lat can be foie in the soil.

I
a

aol. err a

=

I
| Key words
|

déecampeasiton = Auris erganism

-

ee mg ee a

The main soil components

The main sol companents are margarine matter, a ganic matter, walker and air, All
these Components encourage ihe grawih cf healthy craps. The percentages af
coll components are highhghted tn Figure 4.1.

ir
an bal
Kier
dao
eer
Pho

ris ARE

Figure 4&1 foi! composition


--- Page 32 ---
Functions of soil components

Mineral matier (45%)

Mineral rratter also kni@evn ds inorganic matter i the largest camoonent, The
materials tht make up ninercl matter are saa. sit and clay particles. These
parviches help ko:

* anchor traes and crops so thot they stand firm in Ihe soi

* provide mutnents such as miners to plant ke

* hold woler and air needed ty plants fer wgrowtn.

Organic mater (575)

The rreair seurce of soi organic matter is decayed plants and arinials, Thraudly

Ihe process of decomposition, o'qanic matenak ore broken deer and burnect

icte wsehul wwtiants tor plants. To decompose 6 ta decoy, When organic micatter

decoys. it forms humus, Huns i very imoorariiin [he sail becouse if

2 Improves soil structure

«improves soil ferhlity

= improves the water holding capacity ef sail

* helps io rise sal temperature a3 wanmlh is needed tor seed germination

* helps toe nerease the number of erganisms that help decompose orgenic
matter. Organigns are very small animals or palcints.

Water (25%)

Water ig aver imporkan! port of soi, Plants caonet survive without woler Water
alfects the grewlh af plants and is essential for ihe process of photosysthesis.
Woter hele: bo disolve ond transport plant qLtrients ard works as Gg reo Ey
which minerals vital hor oroeth, @nter ihe plant. Its one of the clomencs neecled
for seed germination. Enough water in sell enables the growlh of heallkiy plaris_

Ait (25%)

Plants ne@cd air for resciratian, The air in soil contains three main gases, narnely
oygen, caren dioxide and nitrogen. The oxygen 6 absorbed by plant roots
and aids in ihe process af photosyntnesis. Gxygean i also needed for seeck to
germinate. When there is enough air in sail, pans grew. The air pockets alae
weoter to poss through the son and into the plans. Living organisms that live rm lhe
sallalso n@ed air to survive.

——

Activity 1 Group werk J

Ir arsups make a chart of soil components. Io cach component, label tre
percentage ard function of That sol component. The best chad will be mung

Won the classnaam wall.



--- Page 33 ---
Fs
1

J mee

nswer the questions below.

. Pick guia funckhon af mineral motte,

A. Weproves soil structure.

B. Anchors ees and crops so that they stormed fri.
©. Aids the process of photosynthesis,

D. Helps s¢ens io genninate.

Wnich are the 3 main gases found in sail air?
A. Gaygen, hydrogen and nilregen.

B. Hydrogen. nilrogen ancl corbon choxide.
©. Oxygen. cargon dioxide and nitrogen,
RD. Phosphorus. cilrogen ond hydrogen.
What are the main sail carnpanentst

Why is mined matter important?

Whit is the funclon of ool woter?

Summary

[4]
UI

[2]

The main sell campanents are mineral matter 433. organic mather 3%, waler

255 and air 25%.

Mineral matter provides plots with rmulrierits.

Organic miaiher improves soil terry,

AI heise olants to respire and sell organisnns bo live.

Water absorbs nulients and transports them te all parts of Ihe plant.


--- Page 34 ---
Unit 7 Soil formation

|. défine weoatiening
2, state qaents af vecihering,

Where does inorganic mahér come from?

_ eet Se

Key words
weathering  jporent rock
Me _

ace is formed from broker Gown rocks through the process of wealhering. Racks
aco broken down of different rates because some rocks are hard while others
ore soft, There ore several agents of weathering. These include moving Grinds,
rerniperoture, fraeze ond thas, running water. qroving plants and wind.

Weathering agents

When Tha parent rock is broken coven Thirauwigh the process of wedi thenic, Bll
particles are toned, Farent rack refers ta the original rock fram which otherrcks
ore farmed, Weathering is Ihe breaking down of rocks te fonm sail,

Moving animals

When animals move, ihey tread on small and bg recks. The hooves couse gradual
breaking down of racks,

Temperature changes

The changes between Aigh and low
temperdtires break Gown rocks. During
fe cey when terperdi.res ane high, rocks
expand. At nigak temperatures Fall ana
it becemes cold and racks comtract. The
coninveus @zpanser ond contraction as
shown in Figure ¥.1 causes the rock ta pel
choo crock. The rack oo wedees such

Figure 7.] Avatk peeling of dus lo
Ay t '
that ary form of pressure out On PRE TOCK temperature ehunge

wil! Erecak if.



--- Page 35 ---
Freeze ond thaw

Frecec and thaw usually igppens in very cold weather condiiions. It occur when
weaterenters a crack in areck. [he woter then freezes and @zpands ihe crack in
the rock, Ihe ice melts and coes deeper inte tie crack and the process repeats
unl the rack eventually cracks, Figure 7.2 show: the freeze aid thaw pracess,

3 4

a |

Wauber qulects i 4g hat vale heeres, Ay [Fe cas tas. of Sordracks Tac Froc]ess & repealed.
Screuk ur orc icspance This lores Makar Gals cleapecr ies thee The ffack gels wider are
Ing Cfaich He whan track, (S078 WOH tha rece spas

Figuie 7 2 The process ofireese and how

Activity 1 Experiment NS

lustroting how water freezes and expands in crack rocks.
: Apparatus include: 2 glass batties with lids. water. plastic dish, deep freezer
i Melhod

Fill ane gloss bolle wilh water and close Ihe hel lightly. |
Half-fill the other bottle wilh walter and close the lid tightly.
Place the two bottles inanematy plastic dish.

Place the dish with the bolkles in the freezer.

Leave the apparatus in the deep freezer overnight,

one lhe

- Observations:
i. What happened to the bottle that was tull of water?
° What happened to “he level ot vate in the hal-flies bette?
)2. Whet coused the bollle which was full of woter to bregk?
Record your ooserations in your practical azercise book.

' Abernatively you can look for a small cracked rack, Take a small cracked rock
and place ina beaker and, using a dropping pipetts, carefully dip woter onto
| the rock. Adc the water slowly, shopping “when no more woter appears to have
been aosoroed. Place the sample ind piastic bowl in the freezer. Famove the
rock ora the freezer every marning $c that *he woter mé.ts, add more water
and put back in the freever at nighl. Repeat the process until ihe rock breaks.

—

Running water

Asfrun-ott wolter Mow. ft lifts uo sacks anc they edhercrush back on to the nverned
or collide on to cach Hher or eher objects. Qver hme of Ihe pracess cantnves
the rack will become weak and break.


--- Page 36 ---
Growing plants

Wher ihe root of trocs grow
between rack cracks, hey couse
the crack to widen. These rools wll
aventuoly push with enough farce
to wenden (he rock. causing cracks
thet ead ie breakage.

Figy we Tia Weathering coused by
grinig plonis

Wind

Wind blowing a a very ogh-speed
caries with it soil Podicles and smell
Sores Thad hin on rock surfaces.
weditg therm away. This type ot
weolhenng., shown in Figure 7,4
is Peast cemmon in déserls where
theres alot of sand end wind.

Cary outa survey in your cemirmnuriby Gnididenlily the types of weathering thar :
are taking Place. Ir graups, record, draw or even take pictures of wheat you |
see, lhan seport back to the whole class. Expletn how the different hypes of |
wecthering occur. IFyou have pictures, sick them toa chart and label the hype |

of weathering,

—sar--e rn

Answer ihe questions below.
|. The breaking down atracks results.
i A. evaporation 68, sailformayion ©. respiration D. banspiration
2. Selecta wealhenang agent.
A. Woter B. Clay i. Rock 5. Sand

—



--- Page 37 ---
3. The expansion and contraction cFroacksit Coused by. |
| A wind BB. animal movemern |
| C. femperaivre changes OG, voter

| 4, What does the term parent rack mean? i!)
Do. Explain how wind couses weathering. [1]
Pe
Summary

* When perenl rock is Graken cow through the process of weadtherng. scl
particles are formed.

+ Porantreck refers te the oiginal rock for which other rocks are tormed,

© Weathenng ss the breaking chown of racks to form sol.

© The agents of wealhenng include moving animals, temperature, freeze and
thon, running water, aroeing plants and wird.


--- Page 38 ---
Unit 4 Soil types

}— Organic matter

Clay

Sill

Fine sand
Coarse sand

| Faqure B.1] Layers of sail

Key words

fo soil tecture Boil struchre

Properties of sand, clay and loam

The properties of sane, clay and loan are based on the size of the soil particles,
texture amd structure, air space and water holding capaciy, Sell texture is the
fineness of coaneness of “he soil, Soll stucture refers ta the arrangement of sci
Porlcles.

s

Sand

Sardy sons hove the largest sol
particles. They care Phil in texture
anct have o highly laase jal
structure which couse then to
lage water quickly,

Figure &.2 Sandy cal



--- Page 39 ---
Below are more proaperlies of sand!

© glows air and water ta move Peek

© hos ao wery low woler oldiig copocity

« dry and lacks nubients 10 support plant qrawth
»  eosy fe work on,

Clay

Cloy sol are mode up of extremely small and
tightly packed together soil parhcles. Clay
articles ore very fine in texture, trey are sticky
when weboand become of hard as concrete
when dry. Below are ofier properties of clay:
* has very tiny air spaces Figure 9.3 Clay sail
«high water halding capacity
«canes a lot of mulhents and 50 sucaports

plant growth
e vor hard ta work an,

Loam

Loam i, a Mmixiure of soils and tris
make: it ideal for otant growth. It ts
Usually ao mrixture of sand une clay. By
Cormbirnrig hese sors, loan gets the bos?
characteristics of all the acs. This allow:
for the growing co almast aqy tyoe O°

plant. Other properties ot loarri sails: *
= dllews for good movement of water
dnd air
s high water holding capacity
© hos sufficien! nutients for plant growth Figure 8.4 Loar soul

* cy To wark or.

Aciivity 1 Experiment

Exzperimenk: Determining air conten, water helding capachy and drainage of
Ihe three sails

Apparatus: water glass, water, sand, clay and locm sail

1. Alr

Method
1. Halt fill threc glasses vith sand, clay and loam.
a Add walerin each glass uwoiil soailis comoletely covered,



--- Page 40 ---
Obserroations

4
1]. Check tosee air bubbles conning out. |
2. Which tye of sal has mcre bubbles?
2. Wolter holding capacity

Method

|. Look far 4 cans of Ihe same size,

2, Make small holes ot the boaitemn of Bach con.
3. Half Fill the cans swith sand, chay and Ian,

4. Add water into each can.

Observations

1. How long does it toke Lo drain tie water from the three cans?

2. Whech can allows more woler lo dig out?
a —_..__-

Cease the comect onwer.
1. The orange ment ot soil partic €5 in soil is called _.
A. t@xIure B, structure C. erosion D. composition

2, Texture is defined as the...

A. depoth of Ihe soil

B. fortility of the sci

©. darkness or fightriess of The soil

D. fineness or couseness of he suil
3. Which of the tallaving is a fire seit?

A. Lorn B. Sand C. Cloy D, Silt
4, alrains fastest.

4. Lourn B. Sand C. Silt D, Clay
5. Whicn type of soilis good (or crap oredchon?

4. Sard B, .oHoIn &. iloy O. Slt

summary

© The three main tyoes of anil ore sand, clay and loam.

* Sandy sails hve “he largest soil particles. They are light in texture and locse in
shuctue. Their loose partiches moan they canna! hald waler yell,

* Clay soi ave very small particles. They are very fine in texlure and ger slicky
wher wet.

* Loam 6 the Gest soil for grewiig plants. tis q mixture of sand ane choy. Its
Bcriches ore avenge sized ond it dllows good water ond cir movement,



--- Page 41 ---
| 1, identify soarces of organic rootter |
D2. Wepare liquid morure,

The sails made op of mine a natter, organic matter. sol water and car. Organic
Smocdtier is the compared which detertrnes the level of fertili-y of the soi. When
cil fertility is low. arificiol of nerganic fervciliser can be added a ihe soi, This will
Phe crops to grow well and yields ae imprevcd,

Hey wards
fe aunnings rrlreageri

sources of organic manure

Organic fechlisers are produced fram decayed plants and animal. the mein
sOuUrc|s of organic fertilisers ore animal manure and compel bat ther ave other
sources like tertlity trench, liquid manure ance qreen manure

Compost

A coamoost a yarety of organic matter that has been subject te decomposition
scfore soils added. Commosts one used to increcse sal fertility. Any hype of agenic:
weilihe con he Wed te make 9 cornpeost.

Activity 1 Practical ees eeemenamneee ag

1

Making & campast. |

pee I Nk a Comoost: |

V1. Peg an area ia make a compost (11x 2m] in size.

Put he [rr pegs at every corner.

Pula layer of dry grass and maize shalks or any dry crop stelks. |
|
!
}
|
|

Puta layer of animal manure,

Puta layer oat dry leqves.

Puta loyen ot kinchen waste,

Sprinkle some fertiliser and cover wilh top soil

Reped! ihe pracesses unt] the cempost is about a im high and water the
; caompast ragularly,

NB: IF heatis being produced by tne compost i means decampasition is taking
laces.

Bom on on Be ca) ha


--- Page 42 ---
a
Fertility trench

A‘ertility trench ig a deep trench dug undergryrd thicat is filed willy layers oo
organic matter and soi. | can he likeied fo a compos: ple except Theat ibis dere
underarsund, During [ne sainy secasor, rain weiter soaks into the soilin ihe Warnch
and the organic molter in the teach holds the water for craps during The dry
season, Ferfility trenches are usuel y usedir. gardens. Trey increcse soll tertiliby ard
impiave the waler nolding Capacity. Foure 9.1 shoes o ferklty tench.

gee pte er
lees mit
evga

Compec:l
amen! ain | Tae a0 Carpe |  erwing
OTP hee Irearvt i eh eI B ey

heer li i

Ficg1e 9 1 Fertility Hench

Liquid manure

Liquid menue —§ manure changed inic hQuidd farn, Fore is done Gy ming manure
wilhiwater. tcan be made with any hype of animal mericre. Liquid manure Is Used
because it allows for sasier absorption of nutrents.

Activity 2 Practical ne i

Making liquid manure

|
|
Sheps in macing fiquic manure. |
Geriher any foc of animal maoire (cow, pig. goat. poultry}.
Place the manure ina container thai can be closed tight.

Add water and mix. ;
Clase the container and ix after every 3 cays,
Leeve the manure until Ihe smell goes away. |
Wren wady pour the liquid manure i7 a watering can and Use. _

On On tat ho

Green monure

Seen manure refers te geen craps fiat are grown and cullivated back inte
toe sail betere they macure. Tis ireproves ihe fertility cf the sell. The plants Used
for green marge ae usually begumingus crags like beons thot praduce nircyen.


--- Page 43 ---
™,

Leguminous plants are ‘lowerng plaots thar have pods. Nitegenis avery im mortar:
nitrent reeded fcr plant growth, The sta ks ure pp cughed bockirlo the soilso Inet
Iney Geanonpase and add nilroagen te tee soil, Foe pain odvactage of greor,
Mare 15 that it keeps nitrogen 'n seilwhile improving the water heading capacily
of the sail.

Animal monure

Arima marure shown in the diagrams below, is an orcarre ferthiser that cemes
rem anime|l faeces. Arimnal menure can come frorn differest farrn animals like:
cathe. Goals. pigs and pouliry. Animal manure is importcnt beacause it contrioutes
ta soil fenility by adding nuinenss like nitrogen and ather nwtricnts thet help plards
'O.Orow. [halo improwes the quality of the sor, Farmers can seve ca lob of money bw
WEIN anne. mare cs fertitiser.

Figuie 7.2 (low mone Figure &4 Gok enere

Activity 3 Educational tour - | 7

| Your teacher will organise a visit tea farms thatis near yourschcolr that is within
[the community, Using digves and plastic bags collect and iabel the different
| organic “ertilisers that Ihey have an the fore. Ask the farm manager about bow
Mhey use the organic fertilisers. Write the inforricaticn you Qél in your books.

-

Answer the questions below.

1. Whats crgane manure? [1]
ié. Gve any five different sources of argacnic: manure. [5}
3 Describe the process oft making liquid manure. [3]
4. The outient that is very important tor glaritigrowihis. 0 [1]
summary

= Organic fertilisers are praduces fram decayed plants anc animals.
* The main sources of organic lertilisess are cing manure anc compost but
here ore ciher sources ike fertility trancr, liquid manure and Green: canines,


--- Page 44 ---
1 idedily eroded! aresds in yt’ leroy
4  geccribe the offacts of sci erosicn.,

Flashback .

Inthe erovious grade you learnt about ihe agents as Types of soil erasian In
Groups discuss the agent ch sai erosion. Wire them Gown ard present tiem lo
thie -hass.

eS Key word

— . -
“, siltation |

Sail aragion is the washing away of top scil by wind or water, Soil Grosion Is mainly

coLsed by poor management! of soil, Some of te couses include:

»  oolo.ghirg dawn slope and on steep slopes

© clearing of land leaving the groune: bare

»  streambank culled

6 practicngmotcultre (cultivatnog one crop every fine on the same piece
ait lard)

© not adding organic matter te the sail

- overstocking Motledos to overgraring.

- a. .
UG Ste oa Vda Wa ldarle..

7 "
.ta. . I

Sen erosian resclls i he woshing owey of top sail, The tap soil cantaing al the
aigaric malerial needed for crap grawlh. Craps deneaa an this layer al scl
becouse ‘tis “he rast ferlile. The washing away of top sail will lower soil hortinty ord
oo reduce Crom yields,

Peg Saal

Once che top layer of soil has been washed away. the ramaining laye 6 heared
end the sci garticles are tigh lly packed. This hype of soil ig nol suitable for crap
sreduction os il dacs not alla. water 'o oenstrate through cad is highly infer file.
Cepie 10.b diclays scrme ncteble cdifferecces between wand wih tap sor and oor

soll withh cto scl.


--- Page 45 ---
Feuer (Ol. a) be weet Pezgs sci

Siltation

The sor thats washed cvedy Ey ronal
water i washed iho myers cid dam.
This precess is collod silkafion. Ts is
‘he filing of rivers and dorms with soil.
Sihatien aio duces Ihe amount of
water whch dams and iver sce}
bold, THs affecis the iriqiailian
Sroes 26 Ihe woter levers would! howe
Been reduced. Ferm aninoak alba
depend on water from danny ane

rivers. Figure 10.2 shows on Sxample — a
i q siltert rivear., ars i OTe Seay) dee ayie) cP cleo Ree a
ae hans:

Formadion of quliies ane dengeas

Oo arasian Ccow) resin the Farmicatign
of gulli@s aqd dangas which can
desray  ofocdds. buildings ognd
productive agriculturallang Farners
depend on good «oods 10 transport
ther products io the market Cottle
ana other livestock are also at rien of
Folling in these gules and danas
andihey can get ircLred orcie. Rete:
to Figure 10.3.

ey

Water paliution Figura $6.3 Guliy

Pesticides and her agqre-chemicals wed by farners denna crop productian car
be washed inte rivers and cams, This resulls in water pollution and can resuit in the

deach of ish and other mriarine life.


--- Page 46 ---
a

The dacit on of fertilisers ints tivers cind dara due to soll ercacr cari resuot tm "Pee
neecases growlk ot plants in fwors, Teore Plants wie up rare oxygen i thes vers
ame dams Ths aso resultin ihe decaih cl fish and otder rearing lift due toa lack af

oxygen.

Activity 1 Educational tour §

Tour the area wthin and ouside your school lo identify arecs ‘hat have been |
offected by erosion. Try ard idectity the hype of erosion that teck place and the ;
possible etects bo the surrounding cormmnity, Try and find solutions to oyeid
Derosian and ways bo rechoin the srocdercd 12a.

Answer the following questions.

1, What ts soil 2*osign? [I!
2. Stave any four couses of soil erosion. [4|
| 2) Expl any five affects of sail erosion. [St
Summary

* Sollerosion’s the washiig cway of top sciloy different Cauies.

» Poo sal management practices such a5 avergraang, ploughing dewn
the slope, veld fires, bare and unproiécled soil seam oank Cullivatian, urd
manaculibre Cause sail arcaicn,

» Eecs otsol erosion include loss of top soi. guar sails, silk fion and fernatian

ef gules and daigas.



--- Page 47 ---
Unit 11 Sail pollution

1. define soil polltion
f2. explain the causes ef soil pellucion
4. exploit ettect of sol polutien.

Key words !

Gil pallution toxic soil Centaminafion dHpoésal
uote

—— eS —_

sai pollution

Soll pollufion s the addition of toxke or tarmfu: substances into the sail in a way
lhat destroys the soil and alse brings harm to other living things, Soil pollution lead:
2 sail Contamination. Sc! contarringtion 3s when chemicals, nutrients or element.
In thé sof become more thad mortal. This is usually a resull of humon action.

Causes of soil pollution

Agrochemicals

se chemicals dound in pesticides, herbicides and inorqenre fertilisers are harmful
ta the soil, Tae excessive use of these agrachemicals cantamircales the soil aver-
Time ond reduces ihe productivity cf the lane.

Industrich waste
The direc: and incorrect wav of woyrewater disposal by industries ledges ta soil

cormamination, Disposal means getting rid c* sorreching. Activities ike this make
the sol tosic aed eventually unusable,

Figure V1.8 Sor) paltythan bey industrial waste



--- Page 48 ---
a

we a we roe Toa -+f
eo pepe liar coins!

rigaron melhods like Pood irmaatecr Hook peopel miavacecd can Cuuse sail
calc ear, Flood inigertion can lead tc cvervatonng ond ihe aventlLal dapcs-har
at rutients atlawer ends of lhe field, vertua ly ihe salar the bower end Eorornes
eentar naied Olheracricy tral prectices ike lack of croa cofotion arid rites
Serming gravely decrease ihe Gualily of sor over time.

wether

he sposal of cans, plastics and other sold waste as shows im Figure V1.2 cor
ase cause soll pollution. The mast hanntulis the dis ccsal of nealeries because they
cory harmilul chemicals than beck into "he scl.

The grecesé ot mininginvclyes the removal of topsoil ta get the onin eral underneath.
Ihis cor. turn productive land inte barren or unproductive banc, This in itsei i a
form of soil polllign. The woashe procders from mines ore cle dsposed af onlaid
nec the mire, When ihe minerak ore eshoaveted. ‘herring laqves behind sot [hai
is coniaqinated ond canoe! be used for ther gurpsases,

as a cass, vist a place where soil pollution mn taking place. Wrile down Ihe
causes of pollution in thet area, Write a leller to the Environmer tal Manag ercnt
agency (EMA) telliig them about the pollufen.

S


--- Page 49 ---
Effects of soil pollutlon

Lowering soil fertility

When saris polluted by chemiccls and hecvy metals or degraded due ta mining
|eectivities, 15 fertility is lower or might even be tost entrely. Pollutants also harm sail
microorganism. resullng in the reduced rate of decampasition of plant ard erin!
matter leoding +2 soil infertility, Pollutants qeneraily disturb the natura makeue ot
tie sail.

Reduces crop yield

H tre sail is in-ertiie it cannot suppor plant life, This results in poor yields or mone a-
all. Sal pollution charges the natures of plants and overs crap proaductyity, Sore
Rlant Can even die due to tre toxins ir the sail,

Lawering livestock production

YWoenmolonts aie. it means the animals tid depend on the plans ore tee ol feccted.

Algo. vened plants take Ua the toxias in ihe sail, they pass fem up the food chain

cacangernsg ihe healitia? crimals are Mamenns. [his inragucce diseases ta arcrnals

ond Murcer.

Answer the questions below. |
]

. Whoatis sail pollution? |]
| 2. state any four couses of soil pollutian, [4] |
| 3. Describe any three effects of sail pollution. rth]
Summary

e Sei Solutions the adertion of fox or harnntul substances in-g the soilin away
thet destroys wre sailana alsa brings hanm te other lying tring.

© The causes of soil pollubon are indusbicl woste. agrechemicals. tertilisers. litter
ard Tring processes,

» The effects of soil pollution are lowered soil fertility, which legds to poor crop
yield, and dealh of crops, wich also ofects ivestock producto.

| Glossary |

Organism - is acy living thing. either plants or cmirriais.
Decomposition = - is fhe process af decaying.

HUrmus - is deceamposed arganic natter.
Parentrock . is bre original rock.

Weathering is The breaking down of rocks to form smi.



--- Page 50 ---
(Moderate Ss , meansaversae, i.
Pollutant - i csubstance Inhalt couses pollution,
Follutian - is the intreducton of something Aarntul to the

environment,

Contamination = - is fo mgke something chery.

Toxic - PIedns Foarnful or posers.

Dispose - mears to throw. cevay,
Soil micro-organisms - cre srrmall arirmicls that live in the soil, ;
ee 1 7 —_—— - —"

End of topic assessment ee

Mulliple choice

Choose [he correct answer.
1, Which of bre folloawirg is nota cornparnent af sail?

A, Air B. Organic matter ©, Water DO. Plastic
2 Name the highest camponen: of the soil.

A. Mimercl micather B. Orgad rctrer

il. Woter D, AT
2. [he breaking down cl rocks bo Forni seis coled_

4, decompostion Bo eros

i. wedlhenng D. pollution
4. Which weathering agent forms the 2

Feghre shown inthe picture?

B, Temperdure change
Co. Freoat ‘
CD. Plarts ,
&. The minst fertile par of tne sailig caked
A, top scl B. orant rock, CSA Cl B. sand
é Which scilhes a very caase fexture?
A. Olay B. Loam ©. Sit GB. Sand
7. Which weil is esl suites for plant orceawvth?
A. Clay B, Lorn . Sit DG. Saye
- @ Acoilwhich hos enough nutierts te sucpod plait growths said ta pe _ |.
A. eroded B, polluted C. weathered Cy. fenile
9 The washing avdy of Fon soliscoled___.
A weathering B. ercsign Cc, silkation . decomposition
Id. Causes so erosion.
A. Qvergrazing B, Addiag marr
C, Canlour nding , CSroving reses



--- Page 51 ---
rer

Shuctured questions

Answer aiihe questions in full.

fa ha

a

State any three types of sail.

Identity any five sources OF Grcparie marie.
ca] WiFi is scl prcsllaicarr?

a) Explain bow mining cases sail pollution.
Whit are Thee Tuinchors of the fellavang in sa:
ay inorganic matter

a] air?

[3]
[9]
[V]
[3]

[4]


--- Page 52 ---
Unit 12 End of term one assessment

_ em

Choose the connect answer.

1,

2.

11. The growing of garden crepe fhe flowers and vegetables is <nown as

crop husky D. hericulture

Which of the following is ¢ branch o age lhe?

4. Agiculure sence B. Horiculyre C. Bary produchos G. Greer
Select a correct list ad perennial craps

A Tad, shegorciarr®. poh. B. Maze, tod, tobacee,
C. Beads. ice, wokenrneion. RB. Cotton. sormach, ores.
Anime: preduclian‘s a branch thel deals with

4. voencindion of colle

B, selling of livestock

CC. ransgortahion af annals to butchers

DO. rearing of cnirvls

Which product is classified Under Poultry harming?

A Ralooit men’ E. Park C. Beef DG. AA bfor
— _ 8 nobon cxampene of an animal product.
A, Mutton B. Chicken ]. An egg Dy. Carcass

What is the man ain of aaricuturel engineering?

4. loprolect crops and animals.

A Te teach formers on how te Take prohicbls farming,

C. Improving the effectiveness and sustainability af farming practices.

CO. Increasing Ihe cumber of livestock in the country,

Whol i dhe funchon ata disc olough?

A. Harvesting of whet. BA. Slashing tall grass,

©. Coarshuction of tall buildings. Di. Tillirvey oF learner.

Nar Mebwebu grew o heciare of wheat last year. de sold the wheat to the
Gain Marketing Board and made a profit of $700.00, He oso grew a hectare
ef lettuce and node a profit of $935.90. How much prot did he make

altogether!

A. $1 735.00 B. $1 435,00 {. $255,03 DO. $450.00
Incahich sot does tobacco grow wel?

A. Lod soil BR. Samay sail

C. Sandy Iearn sail DB, Chay soil

Beane ist help Roeriers te:

4, appl; for loans irom barks

B. aicn their finances: anc keep farm records
GC omport fertilisers tran cther countries

OC. buy more trucks te carry farm qutouts

A. agriculture B. vegetable produc ior



--- Page 53 ---
on, Why cla Bonners Ws bon 97
AL To reduce iqures te the operator.
3. Te Take work easier ond effective.
©. Toincrecase lakyaur Gols,
O. Te be farney.
13, Tie following cre ways of maintaining farrn look except
AL greasing metal pets fo protect hero Porn rust
3. olina af pavemenis to reduce triction
Co owashing and drying of tock afer use
u. packing tacls in ther original case atter wee
14. What is the use of a Porrow?
A. Weeding BR. Ladetng materials
, Breaking soil ltrs CD. Ciggina
16. hich of the following tool are sored ona tool Eacred?
A. Hoes, picks. axes and pliers.
B. Drilling machine, rakes. forks ang Worrners.
Cl. Wood saws. screwdriver, hammer ania pliers,
D, Gorden foress, mattoces and rakes.
l6. Records oF __

are included in an inventory of fare IcHals.

4. available iam tools B, total workers ina fanm
i, hectares af cultivated and DO. sold tractors
17. Jsecumy and a roofed storeroom are characteristics of good storage
taciities,
A. Paoinkng B. Yentilobon c. Colour codes O. Size

18 Chacse a correct technique that a farmer can use bo identity toals,
A. beeping toc urevosned after uve.
B. Leaving dhemin the field under ihe sore peasiticn.
 Nuombenng took accerndingly.
DB. Making sure that they are net affected by rust.
1? Why i ihimponant to follow precouboernt when using agrachemicals?
A. To averd caysing harm ta ihe envireniment,
GB. ln onder to apply large doses.
C. Beecause is mus.
C. Ta wear protective clothing,
20. Selech ihe appropriate cclour cooue representation of agrachemnicals.
4. (sreen—- moderately hoxic.
B. Fed —-ftarmful.
C. Purple - extreamety koxic: very dongerous piso.
CD. Grange — highly toxic: very dangerous posan.
21. 4nich of the following § a health problem asociahed with poor use ct
eorocherincals?
4. Bleeding guns. B. Yellewing of keeth.

| . Stomach discomtcrt, D. Swollen tet,


--- Page 54 ---
22.

25

at.

AGO CHEMI 5 itu

A. norbieldes, medicine and pesticides

B. sesticides. racctic.des aia herbiodes
lotion, sprays ancl pag tures

oY

repellents, insechoces ane) tertiliscrs
wan ernvirarmental elect cf agrachemica 5,
A. Toh sein B. Willirey of plants
C_ Death ot posts DC. At pollution team spray aril

Shaneping i age cline rears

AL omesing morure inte plastic bags

B. rover chhecdey machinery fo field

Co sngraving something using die oranink block
D. sending dacuriants Lo post ohces tor stamping

Identiy ane element af weather.
4. Hornidity RA. Wind vore cl. Freesiriy BG. Surshine
Which intent i used to mecsurc huenidity?
A, Rarometer B. Thermometer
C. Hurndity gauge BD. Aygrameter
is he amewnt of precipihanen thet falls at ay gion arac.
A Sow A. Raita Cc. wind CD. Cloud cover
_ Changes in regienal and global climate pattems are influenced by -.-
4, wealhe B. global warming
© heat BD. ogone loyer
Which agicultural activity occurs in natural farming region 17
4&. Semi - extensive forming B. Inlensne farming
C.. kxtearsive farming DP $peciolised farming

Jan oxample of an area found in natural farming regen 4 1

A Beit Bridge B. Mcronderc C, Casne D. Tsholotshe:

OWhakacty ly ia carried aut by formers during [18 tot dry secsan of Armbar?

A. Harvesting moire.

B&B. Preparation for ihe next secsor.
i. Fasting.

Gm. Carowing of wheal.

Soliscoemposed of

A. S% organic noatter, 25% minesal matter, 255% woterdand 25%) air
Bo 258. oir, 25358 water, 4% mineral mathe anid 333 oargarie rather
CC. SO@ water. 15% oceanic maker and 33% oir
DG. S02 organic mather, 29% oi and 25%, water

Why is hues imoortant in ihe sci?

A, Ibreduces soil erosion.

B. Ihevos to raise soil emperabure os saarmith is needed for seed qermineriark.
C, IP prowides water for plans.

CW raduces sail fertility.

. -_—-- ee SF



--- Page 55 ---
ees,

J What is formed after the oreskiig dows of the porent rock?

| 3d
j «4. Sinres B. Hummus C, Soilparticles OD. Gullies
35. The follavtng are agents of weathenng, except . ;
A Moving animes B. feomporciure cnonges
C. feeze and thaw D. stones
34. Expansion aad contraction of rowks causes them to
A. peel off B, swell C. oxocind D. eyvyoperale

a7. What 4 soil fexturc?
A. Ara Igement of soil porcles.
Bo Movement of soil particles.
©. The coarseness or fineness of soil particles.
0. Size of each sal pecrlicie,
48. Wher soil hype has a high waler noidieg Capeacihy?

i 4. Grane B. Sand fC. Clay D. Loam
lag wWhicr sol lype comes ‘are amounts of nubients?
| A. Loorn B. Silt C. Clay D. Sand
140. Organic fertilisers are prochuccd from ;
| AL ferdilers B. decayed arma and plants
C. decoarnposed pkostic OO. indus
Id. ldeniity a good source of organic reanuyre,
| A. Campast A. Garbage bin
f 0, Campaund 2 fertilise GO. Plastics
420 Where 160 Tertiity trench miosth used?
A. On a borg Form. B. Plarstetrari.
. Garden. D. livestock production ore.

743. Why are regume craps matty used For qrean manaing?
&. They eouly dacay.
BRB. They comain mbegen 6hich important far plant growth.
©, They moke o cobourful manure.
D. They are fancy and sapensive.
44, Wheit is the advaniage of using caning. Tanure?
A, lt hes iow nutrients for plants.
B. itis inexpensive,
Cc, Pests arc affected oy iis smell,
D, Growth of weds is speeded up.
45. Soleres'on can be caused by

poeree eee ee

AL IM prepa rock weathering B alonting frees
C. heavy dightoning DC. stream bank culteation
446. One water seurce in Timbobewe that shows a sign of heoyy siltation i.
A. SOve fiver BO Loke Mutiikwa
©. Korea dar DG. indian etean
47. The washing away of fertilisers into fiver and darns resu.ts in. _
A purification of water B. sidcaticr
C. evtraghication D. nutients tar aquatic anirmels



--- Page 56 ---
44. Wreck of the following 6 a human cause of scl pollution? ”

AL AgSOCHeMccs. B. Decayved cnirrials,

Iria rer. GG. Sol cultheectior,
‘ih isonellec’ at toi polluter,

Al Eroderd lane: B. Decaying of dead onineals

CL. Reduced crap yeld GO. Weather
50, Bodtievias are reel frarmntul to the soil becouse

4. [hey are heavy

B. they leak changeorous chomicas

2, of thei colow

D. they melt very quickly
MN
_ Gi.
section A

Answer all questions in this section. Fach queshan carries 5 marks,

1, Listany five branches ot agriculture.

2. 2) Define ihe tern lorninveniory', [1]
bi Copy and commlete tie lable belay,

Maintenance

Wash and dry in the sun
offer use

Woosh aher we
ili.

c] Gre one characternsie ofa good stanage haclily. “It

3. 4) State ony tiee heall arid ernvicnmental eifects of poo agrachern sl
handling. a]
Oo} i, Define weathered, 1]
i, Give any one weerthenng ogent. 1]
4. With the aid of apie chart tkuitrote the soil cormpanents, 15
5, a) Distingusr between vwealPor and clmate, i2]
o) Give any three elermerits ol wedalher. +2]
&. oa) Stoke ary to major sail types |]
o) State any three charcctenstics of loearn scl. [3]

[30 marks]



--- Page 57 ---
ee
Section B
Answer any feo questions. Each question canes 10 marks,
7. 4) List the steps taken to tes) ine water holding capacity of sail, [5]
6) Describe steps taken in compost rocking. [|
& oa). Whats soilerosten? [1]
1 slace any hee agents of soil erosian, [2]
ii, Give teq effects of sail eras on. [2]
my) Wheat is soul polly tions? [2]
| ep How de hurien acteilies conhibute ta sal pollution? [3]
| 7, 3) Fexplan any five effects of sol pollution. [5]
B) Lishary ied precautions taken wher using agqiachernicals. al
| c) Give tne moaning of these colour codes in agrochemicals: green.
| purse and red. [3]

110. o) Cosy and complete the tadie below.

Areas in Ayerndge average Agric ural
| Ihe région | annvalraintall | annul activities
| fem peratures
1 Lo _ Over Tkrmm Cool i...
| Less man :
ke [2]
il bgecini = s00rarni— Hest auitable For
*S0rnorn Ie -24¢C Qrowing diaught
, Fairly high resistant craps [1]
| ike sorghum and +
weed |
4 Woo Very high Limited agricuiture
femperakures oarctivity 5
over 30°C Forestry ard wilclie IF]
G) Whatis green manure? [2]
2) Describe how liquid manure is mode, [3]
[20 marks]
a

te

a


--- Page 58 ---
Unit (3 Woter cine vole

Pst methods of scl micisture conercaron
2. descibe coneroron nethoeds
2 demonstrate soil mosiuré conservation techricp res.

[in the prev.ous grade you. learn abe t ihe methods of rarvesting, starng and |
Locormerving welter. In groves revise these methods and present ther in clerss, |

( my Key words

moisture corserection Woterrstention infiltration

Soli moisture conservation methods
There are mary methorns al sci moisture canscrvation. Moisture is the wo tress of ihe
soland censervation is aiacn atkeeping o oreservirig. Soll marsture preservaal on
is. therefore. an act of preserving waiter in the soi. Maosi of these methods are
cheap and requread Tater are locally available, Tre metiods dim te pray ide
and of cover dor ‘he col ba dveid evoanendition and darsorecstian, These methods
include mulching. manuring, pothole. lie ridging ond crop retatier.

Aig inva

say ching is a process cf covering the soil in ore: to keep moisture im Ihe sl
ard te provide fovaurable conditions for plant growth. Tne midierials that can
ne used for rrulching are lec? oid. yiass, manure, hoy and wood shaviigs. The
maja advartage of mu ching is toot it provenk waler [rom evaporating into rhe
Jrniesorere bul there arc many otrercovontages ics:

* Hep fo control weeck

» softens pla roots tran the ca ct writer



--- Page 59 ---
* helps oo prevent sail & sion
© allows for eory germination of seeds asi enhances soil ter perature.
Figure 14.1 below shows mulching,

Figure 3.0 Grass mulch on strawhberles

Manuring

Adding organic matter ta thie sal helps irpprove soil quality. Improved soil quality
means better water retention in the soi. Woterreternlian 5 the amourd of water the
SaH) con hols. Manuring aba relps to reduce runott and improves water infilatlon.
Infiltrak on is the process of wate sinking into t12 ground.

Pothsling

Potraling show in Fiagure 1.2. 15 a
Evaeam iT OgicultUre where Fanners
fill only wnéere the crops have been
plonled. The former only weakers
and cultivates Ihe aeo around the
Blan! only. Potholing traps voter ie
the hole, which wall then held the
riaishure ard osaist plans 7 grow,
Patholirg ik a very cheap woler
coarcservanon method and each
pothale remains fentle for clout
three yeors Feacducing “entliséer costs

Fignie V3.2 Potholing

Activity 1 Practical

(50 to ihe school garden ond chasse ar cored where you can nake a pothole
to row a simiple vegelcble, It may be spinach, tomoete. boas, or peds, Use
any plant er seed thatis equly available. Care for the clait end watch it grow.

oa

—


--- Page 60 ---
Ser how he aren within the cotrole conmenves mashive as campared to the *s
grec arourd, Ye can abe mulch your hole Tris activity can abo be practiced
ot hens, :

Tied ridging or contour ndging

Ted ndging nvelwes making sail heaps.
These heaps ara called ridges. These
ridges can be bSem Io 20ers high, The
ridges are mode using hoes o ploughs,
Crips are then grewn on top of ihe
‘idges. This is dore accoss 2 sleep doping
era in order to trap fast moving walter.
Tiea ridging helps te reduce the loss of
woted ond sail fron ardble land.

One of the places where hed ridging 15
orachced in fimbabeve is Dombostiovya. Figure 13.3 Med ridging

Crop rotation

Growing different typed of crops every season helps to improve soil structure and
Ike water holding capachy ot the soll. For example, in one season a formar can
grow formatees which are deep rooted and need fo oe walered less frequemnbly
end in anelkier seqsen, onions, that aré shallow rooted and need to be watarnd
frequenty. Plands deaw weoter [ran different depth lavels within the sail. lr: this case
the onions ill pse the unused soil moisture left tran the Jomrotoes roap rototion
may aise improve scl fertility and help control pes*s and ipeoses.

—_- ————§ - ~,

Activity 2 Educational tour

450 class vita Form that does crap production.
Ohserve lhe mathods they use ta caiserve soil a1aiTyre.
Ack the tarm mandqger quesdiang on soil moisture Conservahior.
Write a report about whot youlearrct at the farm,

Answer the follawing questions.
1. The process by which weoter sicks inte the ground called
AL avoapordion B. infillratian

C. transoratien D. phelesyninests
|

i os


--- Page 61 ---
2. Select omebhod af sol rmoslure cornseryalions.

A. Seiling B. Precipitation C. Wotening con D. Petholing
3. Which of (he folowing otal should nat be vsed as armclch?
A. Tin B. Maize stalks
f oC, Grass D. Wood shavings
f4. Withihe aid of a welliabelled diagram. explain tiéd ridding, [4]
SUMAMry

=» Sol moilure preservation is an oct of keeping water in ihe sail.

« Most methods of morture conservalion cim to orovide akind of cover fos ihe:
soil ta avoid avaqporoation anc transpirccion.

2 These methods include mulching, manvuring, potholing, fice fdging and crop
rohalion,


--- Page 62 ---
a
Unit 14 Water pollution

. define water polluter:
. stale couses of weoter palluhen
_ @xoloin the effects of water pollution.

Recop in groups on methods of harveshng water,

7 Key words 7

|

° water pollution eutraphication aquatic lite J
ee = _

Water pollution

The caniarnination ct water sources by improper dispesal cf substances, is kneewn
o4 water pollution. The contaminating substances inchicle plastes. metal obyicts
and yoarious chemical. Water pollufon takes piace on surlace wale budies
[ke rivers, darn, lakes and also on aroundwater like springs, boreholes cimd
WNdergQnoune streams.

Activity 1 Research

Waotoh a vides or how water is palluled. Toucan also use the inteniet Foavaiable
to view Images and videos on water pollution, Fram whal you hove seen, what
}ore the causes of water pollution? }

a

Le _ we

Causes of water pollution

The main cause of weoter polkvlion is humariactivily. These bumen aclivities include
the inmnproper disposal of imaustrial, ining, sewage waste. litter and agrachemic als.
Industrial waste

Industes are a huge cause of waltcr pollutiar. They dump ealrernely harratul
substances inte woter bodies. They use fresh water to cary ower wroste fram heir
faxthornes jate overs, dams or lokes ang acenans,

Mining waste

Mining is a very important industry Gul it has negative impacts on water bodies.
Mining couses water polution an surkeace and groundweilen through spilling
harmful substances inig wale bodies. The water that is wed to clean the minerals
i dumped back inte water badies making Ihe wuler unusable. In Bulenwoyo he



--- Page 63 ---
a

mining acketies around the Unwingwane river is causing water pollution. Mininecy
chemicals are being discharged inte tne river thereby polluting Ihe river.

Sewage waste

Sewage § wasle [ram ames dee faeces. urine ond loundey woste. Sewenge is
usually treated in water trectment plants and the woste is orten disgosed inta
ne ted. This sornehines does not oappen and bewage waste i dumped in weber
baddies v thewt rectment causing wate eollulicr.

In 2@irbahbwe, Lake Chivero & Ihe men source cf dunking water in Harare but it i5
experercing water polluticn, sewage wosle from the Mukivisi and Maryoarne river
flows rte the icke.

rgere WT Woter pollufon ot Loke Ghivere

Litter

The durmigtng of litler such os plasic. fink, néwspapers, glass and metal causes
wota ootlution. Litter can be dumped bolh or land and ‘nh the water hoche:.
When dumped on laia, thease naherias are carried to rivers, dams or lakes and
Goeadn:. This then causes woler pollution.

Agrochemicals and fertilisers

Peshec des. herticides andinsectic des will aneays find their woy nto water bode:
These She micoak are ecsily woshed awoy Oy runoll weer into wae bodies causiny
pollution. When tertilisas orc carigd inte water bodics, they cause eutrophication.
Futrapn cation «@ the rom arowth of plan’ fe in water bodies, leading fo the
death af aquate life deprived af oxygen which the elants W4e up.


--- Page 64 ---
Identity posicle sources of water potuten in vaur community. Think of weys |
lao hep control ihe sgmlos ch water pellutian. Write them down and presser |
Ikvern) ta the class. Collect the bes® ideas anid ‘F passble, present [herr "co the |
Wommunity Pegg. _?

Effects of water pollution

Death of water animals and plants {aquatic life}

The mayor problem coused by water pollution is that ib kilis aquatic lke. Aquatic: lite
can die fom kving ina toxic ervironament, Aquatic life means planis and animals
Ihat depend an clean water tor eLryivecil.

Figure Id. Contamination of water bedies kills fen

Diseases

Hurnors and animals are attected by weber pollutiar. Poluted water hos Exo: teria
wrich couses dscqses like tyehoid and cholera in fhurmnen pein, Bilbaraic is cise ao
-equit of Esilhargian worms found in polluted water bockes.

Disturbance of the ecosystem

An ecosystem 6 a chain of interdependence of animal. plants and other
exganisrns. “f harrn 15 dane to one. it afiects all the argunisns in tne eco water, For
example, if fish die Tom contamicated water: ducks. penguins and bears lose a

ogc of ther dict,


--- Page 65 ---
Reduction of water quality

Impurities in woter change Ire loste of woter andits usobiity, therefore, hurocin
activites like coaking, washing and iigatiar are negalvely affected, Larce
armoun's of money wall hen be needed lo purify the woher ood maken usable.

Activity 3. Educational tour 2

| T) Visita me@diay eqown ord where water pollution is faking pkice.

2. Observe and write down fae main compcnents ot polivtion found in the
Wolter,

oa. Identify aflect of wales ootlution.

ee a eee ee eee

| Answer the questions below.
1.

1. What's water pollution? 21
[2. Describe ary two mmgjor causes of water pallucion, [4
13. Give any two examples of diseases which are caused by dunking polluted

weiter, [2]
A. Exolain any alfect af water pollutior an the ooosystern. [2]
Summary

© The fantearmninaian of wot sources Sy improper disposal of substance: is
kro as water pollution.

= The causes of wate: pollution are industial. rrurung and sewage waste. littering
ard cyrencherricals,

© The stects ot water polluticn ore death of qquatic tite, aiseoses, disturbance
of ine ecosyslemiand reduced waler quality,

¢ _
| Glossary
I
Conserration - Jo keep or preserve so thot it lasts longer,
Woterretention - is tho abiliby of scl io hold waler.
| Infiltration - ihe process ol water entering Ihe sail
Arable land - Bland that can be weed tor agnculbural purposes.
Contamination - is to make samelhing impure or dirty.

Eytrophicotion = rapid groawih of plant lite in water bodies which deprives
aquatic life of caygen ond resulilsin decth of aquatic lite.

—



--- Page 66 ---
End of topic assessment

Muttigie cheice
Choose the conect ansver,

1. is water thovang on fhe ground after reining.
A, Litter B. Run-off ©. Erosion D. Sand
2 The sinking of water inte ‘he ground is called ;
a. eearoration B. transpiratign = ¢2. run-off Do onifilteation
. 3. Whatis polluted weaker?
a. Wolter vath harmful substances. B. Sale dunking “ioter,
' oC, Processed water. CO. Cold water.
(4. Which is a correc! soil moisture conse-vation method?
i 4. Weiter logging B. Solpellutian oo. Tied ricging = 0. Irafittralion

8 Water potluieri
A. COUSes flocds
BE. causes arawth ef vegelaten
C. makes sail feikile
DO. contaminates dinking water: killing plants ane animals
é. Which of {he following moaferials shoud met be sed os a mylch?
A. Tin B. Maize stalks
(. Sarass BD. Wood shoving
7. The rapid growth of plant life inwoler bodes, Litiraate.y leading to death of
| aquatic life fram feck of oxygen is called

A, ftomilsaheri B. eutraphicanon . pollination DC. infiltration
(8. Where is sail moisture preserved in potholing?

| A. Oink in the pothole. Bo Inche surrounding area.

| C. Inthe plant. B. There ig no monture preserved.
19. Whichone of the tollow ng activites adds “o weter pollution?

| A. Soil conservation. BE. Cutting down tress,

©. Adding manure to rail. D. Bumping of industrial vweasle.

10. Soil mostere should be preserved becouse
fA sjyers carry toa much woter

B. animals need to walk on moist scil
i oC, moist sol is hard ta work on

0. plas depend an the mentor wn the: soul

Slructured questieni

Answer all fhe questions In full,

i

| 1. 0) bist ony three soilmosiuré conservation methods. [3]

b] Cescibe any one method in a), [2]

'? a] State any thee causes oT water polluhen, (3

> ob! Expkain any one cause of wercr polltion. [2]
a vo ary four effects of woke: oan. [4



--- Page 67 ---
Unit 15 Plant structure

In this unit you vill: [aaa

1 dentity @stertal parts of the plant.

I
|
|
L

=o —

Hn tae previous grade you learn! about diferent types ol plants and their uses,
The different classes ct crops are field. vegetable, cash and tedder crops. foils,
liraes and flawers. You alse leant on how te class he clams acceding to thor *°
‘Pecycle. ,
Wihoatoare cnnveal crops? Give exarnp 8s,
What ae perennial crops? Give examples.
Whale oleanial craps? State sore excirrvoles.

-. --J L—----_]

— — —-- —.-.- . .-.

a

Keywords
external Bhotosynthesis chloraphyll
stomata Alant reproeductian hertilisa tion

External parts of slants

Extemal parts of plants tefe: to the gules
oats of tons. These are the vaible pars
thotwe can see at frat glance. like the laf,
stern. towers ond roots ok shaver in Figure
13.1. Togelrer they play a very rmportant
role in, tne survival of o ants.

beat

fost leaves ore reer rm co our, [he green
colour in leaves is called chlorophyll, The
CHlerophyll in the leaves ahsarbs anergy
tram the sun and uses it *o moke food in a
Srocess Colle photosynthesis. Leaves also Figure 14.] Eayinel ports of a plant
Taye fing porss cailec slomaka [oct



--- Page 68 ---
a

dilow them to take in carbar didsicfa ard reledie oxygen prouuced dering
anatasynthesis. Pholosyithesis is the orocess whee clants use sumighl, c.arban
Tode and water io proeducd foocl ond oxyqern.

Activity 1 Practical

Fick dqreenieaf Rub it onto awhile piece of pager. What colour is prodyred

wo nn

by tre lect? :

*

Stem

The she 11 gives sunpert ta the pant above the gqrasnd and has buds that develop
into lecves. The stem olds thé leaves in such a oosihen tha’ They can receive
masini sunlight. also transports nutrierts and water to places wathin the plant
where they are needed. from the soots. water and nutients go to te ster then
te the tecives cid Flowers.

Flowers

Flowers are usually coourWl and attractive. This is because they are the
renroductive ergans of the plant Plant reproduction is ihe process where plants
prodice new offsorng through the process of fertilisation. Fertilisqhon is the jain:ng
of the male and fengle parts in the flower. The fertilised flower develops into a fruit
thal cariains soecds.

Roots

The main functions of roots ore te absorb water ard nutrient fram the sail, anchor
the plant in the around. support the ssem and store fond. Exarnples of rool: that
stare food and are oscd as focd ore twee! potatoss and camo!

Activity 2 Practical | .

|
!
!
(1. Collect samples of flowering placts, Identity the external parts of the |
|

| plant. tou can alse use the intenie: lo search for different flowering plants
2. Brow and label the plat suc tuec. A

ee

i Answer the following questions.

i], Mame the part of a plant thet develass ints a frei. [t]
}2. Whatare the main functions ot the plant tracts? [2]
5. ay What is chlorephyl? [2]
food Wheatis the tunchor of chlor ph yll? [i]
id. Define the ern photosyntPerss. [2]
65. What's the tunclion af ihe sierri? [2]
(4. The tiry pores ino leat are callecl _____. Hy


--- Page 69 ---
Summary

© Tne extenal parts of plants are loaves, stem, flowers and 100fs.

» leaves cbsorb sunlight and carbon dioxide to produce food in the process ot
pheotosyr hess.

- The stem supports the plant above the ground and trarnspoats water crn
nutients to where Ihey are needed.

+ Flowers are the reproductive parts af ihe plant,

© Roots absorb water and nutients from [he soil to feed the whole plant,

+


--- Page 70 ---
Unit 4 Plan? quddince

1 ooxplain Ihe importcnce ch mayor plan’ nutierits
2) gaol Ihe inmporonce of ring pla nutients,

—_ | eet ee en

Fonls, like burniar bemgs. recur sielienls. Mutieis mioke clants grow ond
moduce food. We asply manure ane tert liser nto tre sailio odd plant mutients. —

! ye nutmer ts

Major nutrients

Nutlents ore elements that orc needed fer lant growth. Plants n@ed special kinds
atonement ia large ameurnts fer cher grewih. Tasse nmuinerts are called micijor
ninents fhe mar natients are Nilragen iN]. Phosoborsus [P] ond Potassium [KE].

Nitrogen (N]

Bikogen 6 G ver imporarn élenien: needed tor plank growth. It ig qq meyor
cempauent ef chtoraphyd in idecaves. (622 of lhe clrmeasphere i cibogen bul polaris
canoe abserb nilroagen direct ‘ror ne ctmoespherc, Inorganic ane ergeanic
fertiisers cre oved te increase (he arcount of mfsocperiins the soil hoe plants to obéerb.
When plans aoserh ritrogen, they vec to Build protein anc grow. Plants with
high amounts of atroagen experience Pugh rates of pharosyathesis. Plants Hat lock
niiragen have yeliow loaves ang stuaded plant growth.

Phosphorous (P}

Shesphoancas i archer inrepartont putes ceeded by alarts. In photosynthesis.
phospierus helas to transter energy rev surbghr te plants. F aba encourages
early root and plent growth and quicken: mrotunty, It disa increases the strencth
ef cher ond the developer ol ficwers ond seeds. PreosoPcrous detic ant plans
ore coon by purple leaves. small leaves ard poor snallow teo’s.

Potasstum (K}

Potassurre & an esscrcia plont nutes. tis equiréd in kee aenaunss for pecpser



--- Page 71 ---
qreawth and ropreduction of plants, In photosyndhésis, potassivim controls the
amering anid lhe closing of lhe fomata, theretore, cantralling the obsorplian ai
carbon dioxide. Potassium is important hor flower tanto, increased resistance)
ot discases in plants, andimproving fruit qualihy. The shenloge cf pobassivan is seer
by poor {ruil formation, ard leaves that are curdy and dry around the edges.

=~ I ee So gen deficiont

Pogue Vt? Ma leds lieing dake! autriend deficiencies

AMIN? nytients

Minor outients are those needed by plants hi soll quantities. Even though thes
nubienis are needed in small Quantities they are also important for plant growth.
These nutrients include zinc, boron, copper. iron aad mangatese.

Toole '4 bis! qudeienis one tic tacos

Zinc: [fri] IMpoves crop quality and increqses yields.

Boron [B| It transparts sugean, divides cel's and cids production of
parorery.

Copper [Cul Helps in the process of phetosynthasis,

Lreare [Fe] Helosan the process of photosynthesis.

Manganese {Mn} Assists in brecking dawn nitregen and pholosynthesis.

Activity ] Group discussion ne

| In grows. distuss the ditterance behween majorand rina. nutrients,
Discuss the impcikance of ihe mayor nutrients in pants,
Draw and cofour crons thatlack major nutrients.

Gi he

a



--- Page 72 ---
Exercise A

Choose the conrecd answer.

1
1

Which aoe isa rnajor pian’ mccain?

A Clapper B. Poteissi , iron DB. Borstn
2 Aplacteth sunted gowts cic yellowish leaves 19s a deficiency of.
4. rulroger B. iran L. phosphors Oo. cepoer
120 Whicctrigimerd 4s esser rial 1p" root development?
4. Boron B. “itTroger CG. Monganese CG. Phasgoehorsyus
4. Which oe 8 arn escmple of a miner ninent?
1 gy Fame: Bo Pakoussiver C. Phosprorcu. B, Nitrogen
5 (he nutrient ihat controls "he absorption of carben cioxde and fhe sormeficn
of tices 5 clled — —__
A. mongansse F. rilrogen Caine 0. otassiven
Summary

*

+

Lies human seings. plants alo need nulrents fa grow.
The senor nutrients are Nitrogen (N], Phospncrous {P| ane Potassium (Ry.
The suner nuikients inchide ircn, cic. baren and momngonese,

ee |


--- Page 73 ---
Unit}? Vegetable crons

|
11. grow a fruit anda lagume vegetcble |
2. identify vegetable gest ond diseases, |
a

L._—__..—... —_— ee eee*Fe

Fiashback
Jn the previous grade you leat about differed vegetanles and their nutritional —
ivalue. Tou aso loamt how fo grew o rect vegetable. List different types of
vegeahles and give Ine nutritional value,

™ Key words |

l |
i 4 Ingume transplant, sein side dressing

Growing a lagumea

Legumes ore plants Tha: produce pods with speeds. The seeds are very healthy
becaLas [hey are ich in protein There is a wide voriety of t@gumes tke peas,
becns, lentis and pects.

Growing peas

Peas one an easy plant ta qeaw and lhey ao wellia cao conditians sa they will
Grow well in the dry arid ccld 5eq050n,

_

Figure ¢ 7 Woiuee pag olan oeing boaryvested

ta


--- Page 74 ---
Pea variehes
There are many peo varelies that can be grown. The mast common Pods cre
Carden peas. svadr sap pecs aid snow Rds. Figure [2 shows fhese vovtetic §.

Qarcen oes SLU IP SSP pee Is Oe GIR

Figures 17? 2 Vatieties oF paris

Land preparation

Poms grow wellin tertile, welldramec soils that have eroLlah organic matter and

compost andan a location ‘hal gels a lot of sunlight, the “cllowing hips can oe

helohutir oreparing band far planting pecs:

+ fork ihe aed you seuld war to plant your pecs.

« To give ihe plants the best head slarl. hum over your pea Blonting beds and
odd compest cr manure te the soil before plontrnig.

* Add potusiium and phosphorous Fert ser os peas need those hv nuinents ihe
mosh Make sure the soilland the ferti.ar ore mimecd wel,

Planting peas

» Tosneed up gernniratior make dure that you soak ihe seeds Overnght.
» Waoter the garden the night before planting.

» }doke rows 40cm apart

» Drop seeds 2.Senm-3em deep and Scr 47cm apart,

* Coser He seeds 4h soll then mulch the bed.

© Afher miuicchisig. walor the bec.

e Germination :excected a ko fdays.

Caring for peas

When the croe has germinated you can care for it by:

Watering: make sure that the sail is akvoys mois! so thot roots can easy absorb
woter and nutrients, Water at least once a weak. bo not let thé plant dry or élke
lhe pods wl nat tse produced,

Cultivation: shallow cultivation should be practiced. This is dane ta loosen the soil
so ihot there is free air movement. To avoid disturbing breakable roots, ger dly
remove weeos by hard.

“ontinve teking care of te clart uri the nods ore lipe.

+.


--- Page 75 ---
Pest and disease contrat

Ihe most common pesis for cecs are apcids. Checking the plant for pests is
important $a c3 io anticipate the craclem and conkel it before it damages the
lint, Roger car be used ta conhol aphicis.

Teo diseases hat are common to the pea plant cre danpiag aff. downy mildew
and Fusarium elt. Theté can be trealéd by using treated seeds, growing resistant
varieties, planting on wel-crained soi and weeding.

Harvesting peas

Poas are Usuolly ready for norvest 50 ba 8G days afier pluning. Depending an the

We, peas can Oe harvested:

© When pods of the peas appeecr te be swelling cand forn viibls founded Pacis.
Pull firmly but Gerly co os to not break the plcnt.

e When baresting for ihe seed, dart when ‘he pods are ay.

* intre moming te aveid pod shuttering when it ts Frat.

+ Whernyou are done harvesting, cunivats ‘he plant nie the soil to improve sii
Fertil ty.

Marketing peds

Peos con be sold (ech or ciry. Fresh aoas sould Fe packed ond keabin a cel
Roce, Fresh pecs con be canned or lroze to preserve them fresh. Dry pooeas
can be place and kephin a dry place. Both fresh and dry oecs can he ecld im
supenrnarkets

Activity 1 Research ain

| Think of vorus ways you would qradc, package, price, ddvertise and sell your
| pecs. When would you stat advertising your peas? Write down all the infornatior
| yOu would need bohore the plant fpens. [his i. so Ihat you are ready for the:
selirg cand marketing sec30n.

Growing tomatoes

Temalees are a ponulor garden vegetable. They
Ore adowarm season crop. They are easy ta grow
and produce a iat ol iruit. Tomatees ore rich in
vitamins 4A. Band C.

Tomate varieties

There ae many varieties ct tamaloes, Figure 17.4
shows same popular tomato varietios which are
money maker, oluriard heetstedk tor ctoes.

Figure 17.4 A tamato plant

i


--- Page 76 ---
Toney rrgker bom plu torrals bees eck tomato

figure Vf a Tornote veirieties

Lond preparation for tomcices

Iarmotoes reauire forties, well drained and deep lsanniy so 1b grow.

« Choose an area thoatreceves erraugh sunhghe.

» Use cdhee orscode lo sig deep inte tre soil. Tomotces are deep rooted plants
2o there is need for deep Gloughing,

© Add manure and compost io make the soil tore.

+ Use o fertilise: hat has all the three mutnents: citragen, photphorous crv
polassium.

* Moke sure thal the qreeind is ‘lat belore paanting,

Monting tomaiods

Tomatoes cre qrown from fransplants. Transplanting 5 ar act of meving 2 Tully
genninated seedling and plantirg i in a mermmunenl iocation For growing. A
secd ing isa very young dlanl grown rar a seed, Ensure thal you grow the seed
Ineernall coniciner firsi. They can be transplanted after they arc about 1Scm teal.
- BPiga hele foreach plant. The hows should be obovt scm deep ard acm to
Scr capscat.
a Make sure Ihoat you cover the roeo’s ertiraly anc mulch.
= Woter the bed genky.

Caring for fomaloes

Watering: Water regularly for the first few cays. During the growing penod, continue
woaterng to endure the plant docs nat dry up. Walter in the marning ta ansure tat
the plant has enduah moisture te cory it through the dey.

Side dressing: Sic dressing isthe application of fertilisersina circle around individual
plants. Side dress plants with, fertiliser or compost every hea weeks starting when
ire tomate fruits are about 2.5cm in charne ter,

Pruning: Prune plants by pinching aff side stems so that only a couple of branches
are crowing “am each pant. The side stems arew between the Branch and ihe
main stem, As the plants grow, iri call lhe lower leaves ct the balla of the plant,
This Helps to keep discases fram saread ng fam the soll to plant leaves.

Weeding: Cullivate to remove weeds and te qerale the soil


--- Page 77 ---
Pestand disease contral

The mast commen pests that aHack tne tamale par aie aphids, lec booths,
hoariweormms, qemobodes and whitetlies. The best wav lo contral hese pests is to
se insecticide that kills the pests.

There are many diseacses that aHect tanoatoes, these include bactertal will early
light. iate blight amd leat malct. The best way 10 conlrol these diseases is To grow
‘he clants in qood fertile soi! thet is reguiany watered. Healthy plants cee rms
more likely to resis! diseases and cther problems. Sseping ~-be garden free from
weeds abo helps a cornrol diseases.

Harvesting tomatoes

Tomateces luke 60 70 80 cays to mature farr. tre day at plaating. depending or ine
varicty, Wher tematices are tully motued ond ready to be harvested, they will ici!
‘igh! aif ihe plant without much effert, They car aso be harvested earlier before
they are fully rine. The tomatoes shovid be washed ond dried belore mace
them ina cooldry place.

Marketing tomatoes

Tamaliees are odasy io sel in
Pmbohwe because they are a
yer important cooing ingrecd ant
Tomatoes: are picked ond graded
ot the sore time. They are qeaded
into large, medivm and srncul.
Tamaiass can be neahy packed
in plastic or box poackoging for sale
nn seomaket and vegetable
markets as straw im Fagure: | 7.5,

ee ee i eS Ole

Activity 2 Project.

Growing your own fomate |
I
I

:Materlols needed

| ary cverage plastic container of old oot. a stics. string, Cornpeast fran garden
and tamoate seeds |

Meihod !
1. Mix crornpest and saland pul tin your cartainer.
12) Make g hole -n the cantoiver.

(3. Pol the Formaco seed nside the hole and coverw ith compost a



--- Page 78 ---
P4. Wher the seedling has goroncted aud green Go a height ot bacrr. tic wu
| bamboo slick ho the plont o supper ib

| 5. Remember ‘o always waler ihe slanc well. Tomatoes grow well wreere Irene
(0 is Sriuah m.cisture ard sunt ght.

P46. Atte sight weeks the tumate wil le rips.

‘ Make aiormata book 21. Cn the fist page. write a surmtiary record. This inches
“he olont meme, dote soar, dow of germination ond dote af harvest. On
the following pages daw a weekly prclue of how Ihe plait has develope:
lone de:cibe it, Whon the project ands cempcre icles aid srow each other

. .
-—— — — —- + - — - - . .— —.- - - + *

| Answer the questions below.
ji. Legumes ace rizr _.
A. carpohydrates 2. minerals . Pro‘ ens OF. vikarrins i
[2. Which: the bes] wecthor candiPan fo arew macs?
A Cal Bo Wore < Dry GO. Any weather

3 Which one is neta vanety of peas?
(OAL Snow &. Cockiall ©. Garden D. Sugar snap :
| 4. Tomatoes are plantedos -_
| A. tramsplonds B, cuthriggs leaves D. rots ;
PS. How lora da temoatoes take ta moture from planting day? |
A. Wio20deys B. 1l00te 0deys CO. 30taa0days 1. 40*o G0 days |
“6. Narne any one pest iat attoc's peas. LV] i
| 7, Name ony two diseases Inat affect tamatocs, [2] :
S. How cine trash pecs stored? [1] |
| home any ane variety cl lomatoes, [i]
SUMmmMary

= Soi and ted orectordlion mus) oe dare betore clantng any garden vegetable.

*  Weternd. weeding, pruning. cuitvation, pest aid csease contrel are same of
Ire woys ol Carag fora vegetable rep.

- [Pe lost stages of growng a vogelchiile croo ore harvesting and marketing


--- Page 79 ---
Unit i Field crams

lL. planband menage 4 céreal cap
2. ently pests and diseases of cereal crap grown.

Flashback -|

The main fie d crops qrewn nm Zimbabwe are maize, wheat, sorghum, groundnuts.

weflower, field beans. and sova beans, In the pievious grace you learnt abour !
the inpetarce oF field craps. Frese include source af fase, income, rere
matenal and stock teed,

|
|
|
l
_._-____]

a —_——-

pe Key words |
D germination commeditie; broadeasting drilling dibbling |
Growing a qQ ceregi crop

Cereal crops are a member of the grass family, Cereal crocs ore grown lor ‘heir
ed-ble seeds and for livestock feed, The mast common cereal craps in Zimbabwe
are mae, wheal and sorghum. CHher cereal crops include rice, oats and borley.
In this book you will learn how te grow wheat.

Growing wheat

Figuae 18.5 Wig! growing ind “teld

Wheat if the second mo impotanl cereal crop in dimbohwe after maize. This
i BeccuUse wheal produces Hour that is sed far hasic cammeodites like brace,

oo?


--- Page 80 ---
a
uns cme moakos, Cloramadibes are ary cgpinculigeal pacar heat cicary tee Eau hal
Or cl.

AYanting her

Tie wheal crop is very secutive to tempercture soi is Gest grown in the cry cna
cold secion vnder imoater, There are some vatietes that con be grown in the
mn fein season but the daadvantage with this is that there ia hgh risk ch dl secises
cid weeds. The high lerperdtures ako easy Lit lew yields, The dry weather is dec
far wna pening. Wire: wheel it plarted irom Aor to ric-hoy and hares-od
Fram mid August fo mid-Septenizer,

Land preparation

Tre sol rust be well drained, Jerlilé aac deep. Whe needs 21 bmalance of call bre
maejar plat ivtrients, nitrogen. prospherous and potassium including all the ocher
minor muinents.

Floughing is dane using either amechoanica. o ox-drawn plough, The mnain reason
for ploughing is ta ensue a good soil skucture. Ploughing alia helps Gury weeds
ane] olows movstore to soak inic the soil, Wheat crop needs an even and compa
fed fer good and yoitorr secd georrningaten.

Figure 18 7 land being sleughed by o dlise pladuch

The folowing steps can be followed when preparing and for wheal
* Selecta prece of land and clear it

¢ Alovar the ond, spread manure or Sampost aid mis weil

* bevel the laid to snake sure lis ever.



--- Page 81 ---
a,
Planting

Seed seleclion is very important, Forres are aacouraged ta use nigh quclity

s669 [hot tree tram diseases lo ersurc high yields. The ideal plant population

ter wheat & 220 - 230 plant perm, This usualy depends on lhe seed size. nele cf

gennination, planting conditians ard plartirg method. There are varieus methoels

that car be usec when dowing wheat, These meihods incl.de broadcasting,

arWing and dibbiing.

* Broadcasting is the sccttenng of seeds by hand or mechanically over a lores
piece of lane.

© Criling is a mecdbot rot uses G seed crill to sow the seeds at proper deplhs and
distance and ren cever them with soil.

© Diobling ts a methed of pulling a few seeds aia hole. mde on fixed spacing
and depth usineg a ditble or planter cr very ofter by hand.

4for plarting the seeds. the land showd o#8 watered and kent maist uritil Ihe
seeds qerming‘e.

Activity 1 Project EN

Growling wheat

Work together a5 a class *o prepare land ‘or canting wheat, Follow the given
Infenmation on land preparation and plariqng ta make your own simple whet
fel.
A

. me, a,

Caring for wheat

Watering: Winter is a cold-dry seasonin airboatiwwe. this is why wheat is Qrowr Ure
Irgation. Light irigaiion must be gone during and after germination. Gerrninatian
5 the development of seed lo pant, Gnce the roals have completely developec,
Inmgaton must be done fo match the rate of use by the cros and woter nAoldine
capacity af the sol tyee. Irrigation must shop when the head of the crap turres
yolloaw, Follow ihe sore principles when wotleieg a small bec.

Weeding: Forners musi @nsvre that tere are no weeds in the wheal field until the
crop reaches maximum height and dévelaps fowers. Weeds compete with ihe
crop ter wotor and cuties.

Fertiliser: Fertiliser application i¢ very imgortani since wheat requires a canstant
sup oly of mostiy ndrage 1 and phesphorcus.

Pest and disease contol: Aphids ard stalk borers are the pests that attack wrecit,
Aphies tend toa attack the crop soor after iting, while bocers attack cfter Hawering,
Whee)tis one of ine host crops gor the fall armyworm so formers noed to lock out
‘or Ihe pest. These pests can be contraied through Ine use of peslicicdes.

a


--- Page 82 ---
a

The diseases that affect wheal ore leaf rust. stem rus, pewdery mildew cine
fasarium Reca ECght. The best way ic contrel ‘hese diseases 6 fo grow ‘esista
verietes. The uve o* tungicide soreys ib aba recarime dec for disease Drone: Creses.

Harvesting and marketing

Harcsting is donc mid-August te mid-September. Wheat is usually horvesiec: by
a combine harvester or very arge fields a5 shown in Figur 74.3. The carbine
harvester cots gnd ihroshes the crac lecuirg behind the stalks. The slelks can ler
me used as gtack feed. is abo pestle te hand harvest and thrash small areds
al wheat, 1] harvested wheal is Collected by the Crain Merkehing Board [GMB].
The GMB collects and seis altast all ine cereal crops in Zimbobe.

Figure 13.3 Combine horvester hoyvesting wheat

Activily 2 Project

Monitoring your wheat field

After planing you hove te monibor your whet til it reacnes moturiiy. Make sure!
a the crop hos enough mowitre at all times

» thers cre mo weeds

« check hor pests arid disecscs

© oadd the aopronriate “ertisers.

ee 4

i a


--- Page 83 ---
‘answer the questions below,

1,

Pick (1 Gere croc.

A. Wheat B, Potatoes c. Onion D. Growndnuts
2. Which is the best season io grow wheat in fimbobwe?
A. AACA ain B. Holand ar
©. Cola aid cry DB, Post rain
3. Whatis the alher major use of cereals besides providing food for humans?
AL Gaining B. Fackaging
| eee Cece! bela it OD. Livestock feea |
la, Slate any ihree aspects cl caning fora cereal crac, :3] |
1S List any three methads of planting cereal cropas, a]?
2. Name the compaoy responsible tor coalecting most of the ceredl Grays ir |
! Pirmibecaky we 11]
Summary

Cereal craps are a member at the grass family and arc grown tor their eciible
seeds and fo: 'tiveslock feed.

The most common ceredal Crepes in Zimbebwe ae maize, wheal and sarghum.
Cereal crop planting methods inchide Broadcasting, dribng and diebling.
The aspect chinking care ofdceredl crap include watering, weeding, fertiliser
dress, and cest and diseqse contre,

Harvesting in very longs fields 3s utually Gone by a Combined harvester.

The Grain Marketing Board collects most af ihe cereal crags in fimbabwe,


--- Page 84 ---
a
Unit 1? Orchard/frult trees

1 identify a suitable site For ar. archaea |
?, nrepore a ale for glerating fru tres
[ 3. lars truit trees. |

You Pave learnt nem to differentiate Bervean exotic ardindigenous Wees. Tou
now Understand ‘he ditterent meihocds ot planting Tress. ‘hece Include seecs., |
| cuttings and gralhng. List the diferent trees that ae grown fram each of ihese |
jrmmethods. |

a a = . -

/ Se Key words

| y sus ciracbanity pera
| oF

NS

a

-———

a

Identifying a suitable site for an orchard

When planning to make an archard, # is important to be mindhul oF the bacctors
a witl atest fru Quality and orchard sustainability, 5ustcidability it Ine ability ta
bass horig, Usually fruit ees produce truit bor about olo a yeors, this winy corel
site identification is important, The site must be able to allow the pronuchan of
hiah rut yields and long lee lie. Below is an exomele of an orchard.

=z

a d

Figure 17.7 Ari ached



--- Page 85 ---
Factors to consider when choosing a site foxy an orchard

Climate: Factors like fenpercaure. rainfak, wind, light and humidity are very
Tnpatant for selechan of fruits ta be Grawnin an ochre.

Salk lhis rrpotant ic have knowledge of sail type. its cepth, Fertility, water table
and grourd rock status before selecting a site for an orchard. Fre archord site
shauld hove uniforn soi ane top sellon which the fruit trees wall arow.

Slape: The mavure of the slope con affect fil prockhiction. Gentle slopes ollew
wale to sink aod ihrere is less @reasiori,

Water There should sé 0 pernanent supply ot woter nearby.

Distance trom school: The orchard shoulel be wilhin Ihe school ora stort walking
distance sso the schol.

Préparing a site for planting fruit trees

After choosing 2 tte these are tte sleps to folow when preparing the site far

Slantina:

* Clear ihe land Ger rid of all the weeds, grass end alher things their rnicgit
itludas Ire growth of trees.

- Pough the land, Bees ploughing & reedes for the growth of Ine roots and
Wither Crore,

= Lees harrow fo léve the land aad breik lurrpss.

Planting and caring for a fruit tree

Laying out the orchard

Thee layout of the otha ik very important. This ig the coarefyl arrangement of
‘ruil frees ata suitable distance for proper development. The kaveut ale helps
mc dccommogatirg the -equred number of trees Ger und caved. tt ala makes the
archard loo beautitul The types of layout include the square and triangle method,

- Tr — fy ris
! ' 1% my cok rh
I ; 14 Fa 1 _ !ok
! \ 14 yp toy ‘ aan roy
! | Ne ee
I
e * % # | or
ee el a ie: ee aaa te a
oy |
!

Figure 94.2 Square method Figure 19.2 Triangie method

7


--- Page 86 ---
Precoring a planting hole for a fruit tree

* (iq oa hole 4Ser deep, vwde and long

* Separcte the top sal and the subsoil

© Pubsome eaves aod grass inte the hac te abeut 30cm

+ fix top scilwith PGkg decomposed mariuls

* Add lkg ungle super shocphate fectliser and mix

e  Pul the rristure inte ire role up fo ler above the ground
2 Crecte c baer ane water the hole.

Pop 301 Bor tom sai

ela

Figure 19.4 Planting Webe

Transplanting 2 fruit tree

* Toke Ihe seecknq

» Radke @ hole ot ihe centre of the basin

e Place the seeding and cover with sail

> Press the soil hard to avoid air pocke*s

* RAKE sure the pleat is upright, Te the scechng to a stic<e te sup pert it
¢ Woher [re ree aod mulch.

Figure 17 5 Tiansplanting of a Iruit bee

=


--- Page 87 ---
Caving fore fruit tree

- Make sure iPe tree is odequarely walercd, Roots grow well in mocst soil.

* Keos the fruit trees free from weeds,

= Prachee shallow cultivaicn to looser the soil, This allows for free oir movemert
ond woteninfltratiors.

e Check fer nutrient shotages and add monure and the appropriate fertilise:

© Prune to remove unnecessary branches frorn Ihe tree. Pruning is cutting dood
and overgrown Branches fram toe trees. Pruning hels to inmorcve plant heeltl
and avoid wnnecessary orowlh.

© Spray to remove pests and cantrol ciseases,

 ———— A =e
.

Activity 1 Class Project :

D1. S@lecd a suilatle site hor an orchare., |
2. Prepare a site for glanling ihe Fruit trees. |
3, Phort the frond [rees. |

| 4. Core for the truit tees, }

———

Answer the questons below,
1. ol Identify any Iwo facler considered when choosing a site for ant

orchard. [zi
, 6) Desorife the fackos dscussed in Tal, (1)
2, Name two methods of laying out an orchard. [2]
(4. What ore "he beref of prining fruit trees? [2]
Summary

. When planning tomake an achard. itis important to be mindiul af the factors
that wl othec! fro quality and orchard sugrainakility.

= The factors te consider are climiale, soil, slope, water ond distance from school,

» After choosing a site tre land has to be prepared for planting.

+ Alanting an orchard involves choosing a layout for Ire orchercy, preparing c
ABlanting hole and transplanting the fruit trees.

s Th last thing is taking care of the archard. This should be dene fer as bored as
The archers exists.


--- Page 88 ---
a

Unit 20 Forestry

In this unit you will we.

I
stare facto's censideréd vhen chocang a wocaalat s te
describe shes in sile preporabon
E Slant s@ec edtings.
In grade 3 you loosed at estaclishing a murseny of cxotic ond indigenous “
_

List eee exotic cine nd genous wees you sll ramernnber,

Key Key words

wood lot wiiter-logging convenient herbecide

Factors considered when choosing o woadict site

Plarting and caring fer forests 6 imceartanl for people's ‘ves and if can ako boa
business. Awoodlat is an qiea sel aside specifically ior grawing trees. The lrees
groan nwood ols can 96 Used to procuce timber, furniture, lor canstrochon cine
they ade mare oxygen te the atrrasphers. There are tacters that rust be kepl
noitic when choosing a woodla' site in one: to ensure the successtul growth of
vees, Figs 20.1 shows ¢ woodict found in Zimbabwe.

Fiqugie 20 7 & woe diet



--- Page 89 ---
a
Climate conditions in relation to tree type

His impertand to corsider Climate in relation te the tees ona weints ta grew. For
Instance. indigenous forests grav well in low rainfall creas while esntic ones thrive
In hegh ronal erecs.

A sUiGblO ale should also hove fertie deep soil which promates tree growth.
nis asa need adequate drainage for Good growth of trees. Poor soil crainage:
Saures waler-logaging end pants are not able ba take up: eeaier through their rats,
Waler-logging means fooccing with water,

Tees also need o site with moclerate winds. Tad slrong winds are mast likely to dry
oulsok and even pullup ia.y foanled trees.

If site does not have ihese conditions, extra care tourprove conditions will be:
ceeded and thoatis on extra cas:,

4vdiable space

Trees de ro grow faa well ender crowdes conditions. Soace is Inerefore can
Impoarnt conscerron when choosing Oo woodiot site. A sie sricula be able te.
provide enough space for the intended number of trees to be planted,

Site location

A aite located near a main rode is more canveniont as it makes it ecsier te extract
and transaort the trees offer harvesting. Canvenient means well placed and ec,
to reach. For sxamale, if the trees ore to be processed inlo timber at 4 different
location, a woodlat location near Ine road makes Irensportation easier.

Pests ond diseases

Pests and dieases iran area should be thought of before picking a piace ar
quile. Some arens are ror prone te pests thatimight affect imees than others.
There are insects which feed on the leaves, stem and Surrow Fhiaugh the bark. This
Negaivey impacts the growth of a tee and alse reduces ts queility os if rcanays,

Future considerations

When chonasing 2 3ite. itisimpartont te ako consider if it willbe usable and suitable
in The long run. For éxarcpte, a site might have fertile soil and -eceive the neecdec
roin fall, byt iFit hos power lines. H means thet in the lerg ron os the trees grew, they
might interfere with the power lines and even require culling down before they
ful y rrcture.

At limes the sal might be fertile and the crea m‘ght be receiving adequate rainfall
but then clirate charges migh: see Ihese cond 'tians change in the future. Years
Gown [ne dine. the soil might vot be os fertile. It[s importante keen (his in rind,


--- Page 90 ---
Pa
Activity 1 Educational tour

| ragine you Pove ose  tassed wich smarting a woodloar as am agricultural
enterprise fora class prajec™.
| 1 Arh tee assishance ot your leacher, go and look for a site fer your woodlc.
I> which factors did you consider in selecting the silé you chose?

3. Are vou going to grow indige nus or exohe trees?
14, ive | nm name foe your wooudlot, Ps

Senn DR RE i ae - -
| Answer the lollewing questions.
|

I
Wear ip aweodlott

| A. Lael filled with wood.
|

——— - —_—$———_—S ==. —_—

Ro Trees grown for irked.
C. Lanc used far arceicis reas.
Oo An area for ore ng craps and roc.
9. Which factors are carsidered when chocsang a woodloi?
A. Site location, economy and the police.
B. Chrnate, avaliable space and ale locatier.
c Pests and disecses. future comideralons and fencing.
3. Clearing (reas. fene-ng ond climate.
2 Listary two ways in which trees are Use*ul te people. (4,
4. Why is site lecation fora wocdlal importeirl? ee
5. Give un example of a future cansidesa ion, |

| —_ a a —_—— eee —_—_—_—_—— +

Steps in site preparation

Land preparction is the rrain task in presarna a site for woodlots, The folowing
aclivities mus fe cared ou".

Fencing

Young es need protection from both damest co and wiki anirials, A tame wilt
horbed wire is Usually used to prohect woodiels,

Clearing trees

All bees growing ‘nthe fied shou'd Se removed. Slarniping with moaltocks and
crovels should be camed out fist. Its important to ako sprey herbicides at this
paint once) the land is cleared, te remave Competing vegetakion. & herbicice iso
chemica sprayed to kill weeds,

Ploughing
Atter leairg the vegetation. the land should be ploughed. Roots and stones

should be removed fron tre held,

rhe


--- Page 91 ---
Digging holes

4 planting ling i used fo make straighl ines. Planting holes are marked 2.5m apart.
Tree pianting

Tree plarting i3 art all-yeor round pracess Gs shawn in Figures 20.7.

Figuie 20.2 fucaly pts planing colendor (Source Forestry Comnwssio]
Planting seedlings

Transplonting seedlings

Seedlings ave rasecl in polihene bags. Caring snd WOOTEN SImporant until the
secdlings are ready ter transplanting.

Plarling ou: is done in December when the solis moist. We can centinue to clont
Lat end of january. Aer January, ihe cycle begins with preparation for the
COT PHAMhM Secs,

Flanting out

When seedings are 252m 3om high. they ore reacy for transplanting. Steas tc
follow when transplanting seed ings:

1. Dig heles with hoes.

2 Remove polylhene bods.

4.0 Turn the seeding upside down and remave the polythene bog.

4.0 Flont the seedling in the hele.

&. Fillthe hole with soil.

dé. Press sof Ground the seedling with your qtands or feet.

?. Make a basin around the seedling,

4, Water Ihe seeding.

%. Record the steps you have folowedin your exercise dooks.

10, Pace the pohthere bogs and keep bem lor use in he mes secsert.


--- Page 92 ---
1. Reriave polythene packets.

9, Plane seedling in positions.

3. Fill ‘ales with soil,

4. Fir he sil around the sesdings.
re)

é

| Aoke o basin around the seedlings.
. Weater the seecilings.

ee

we eer

Exercise B

Answer the questions below.
1 Which ene is neta factor considered when choosing a woodlor?
A, ‘hinmcbe B. Avoadable space il. Site location D, Asbesto:
3) Pick out an advantage of locatirg a weodlal site near the main road.
A, ibis easier te see Custemers Coming,
B. tis ecsier te transport bees a*ter harvestinc.
i. [his easier to get holn.
D. lis easier to make fiends.
3 Which are the correct four steps in site ore parotiqn?
4. Fencing, clearing trees. ploughing and digging heles
6 Culivaling. planing. pavahing and harvesting.
C1. Feneing. colliveting, ploughing and digging totes.
& Cultvalirg. digging. clearng teas and harvesting.
d Tree plantings dere —_.

A once ayear B.A postromn (lL. twite 9 yeur D, allvearrownd
5. Alwhat height arg seedings ready for transplanting?
A, 14cm B. 25cm. C. 1Scm-2icm B. 20cm

é. Plarniag qubis dence in December because

4. there ore alot of craps

| B. the soil will be mot

: oC. people willbe energetic

O the weather wall be porfect

What is the wie of a planting line?

4, To make straight lines,

BA. To Grejhe rows.

&, Toremove weeds,

O. To moke the loncdrecdy tor cultivcating.

28 Acbemica' sprayed to kill weeds is called d/an —_—.
A. pesicide B. hedbicicde
C. insecticide D. acarcide

ae |

ir oe


--- Page 93 ---
2

%. Toung trees need fericirng tor
4. protecton fran domestic ord wi 4 animcils
BA, decomhor
. protection torn fires
Do roaking trees feel sate

1d, -couecs woterlegaing,

1A. Foo much sunlight B. Poor ararnenge

2. Hey rintest DL ithe poi fell

[ 11. Why is climate important wren choosing a site fara woodict? [2]
IP, Besides climate, list any three factors considered when choosing 2 wood|ot
13, How ore weeds removed turing clearing? J1]
I4. Seedlings are raisedin_.  __. fl]
bo. At what height are seeclings ready for teamspiler il imey? [1]
16. State any two steps in sie preparacicn, [2]

rm

Summary

7 A wond|ol is an area speciically se" aids for plant ng bees.

«Trees are important fo: oroducing timber. furrvture. for construction and
Eroviding Onygern "oO beon'e.

» There ore factors that must be cons dered wher choosing a waodlat site such
a$ climate inrelalion Io ihe tee ype avallable spoce, site locotion, Pests acl
s0cses and some tube considerations,

* Steps to be followed in sie preparation are fencing, clearing trees. plex rghing
and digging holes.

= Tree dlantngis an al-yecn round process.

+ Planting aud is done in December when the soil is meonst,

*  Seedings cre reday for transplanting when ihey are 25crn 3Gem Aiegh.


--- Page 94 ---
re
Unit 21 Plant protection

C1. define oosts and wocs
.2. explain effecs of pests and weeds on crops
| +: sugqMes| appropriate melihods ot controlling pests and Wee cds,

Ingrade 5,ou locked at the effects of animals. fire and dro. ght or polaris. Yat
are sore al the ways Ihrough which animals alfect plants?

—_: i S580 SF

Key words /

pests wees
oe
a

Pests and weeds

The health of plants is threatened rmastly by pests and weeds, Pest are Insects
which altack crops, Exornples of posts iic’vde aphids, stem borers. locusts and
difforerl tyges of caterpillars. There are alsa Gest birds which attack crops. Weeds
ore unwanted plants Ihat arcw cand compete for nutrients wilh cullivated patants,
Examples ot weeds include black pack, Couch grass, IKK WE OI ropoko (rcs.

Effects of pests and weeds on crops
Effects of pests

Posts cam cause serious danmwige lea craps,

The major effects include:

© Gamage to planl parts. Some jesb tood
on the leaves, burrow sheros. fru and
roots of glands. This affects Ihe quality of
the plat.

© Font Iiectons. Some pets carry
baclna fram plant ta plant which
infects crops. for azam~le. aphics. This
cripples the health of the lant.

« “eld losses and droughts. sometimes
pest damage it so severe thal it leads fo
eroughl as yield 6 very low. "or ns-IN66 1 figure 21.1 ¥egetable affected by aphids
nvr of locusts han Couiee scl Pic cke,



--- Page 95 ---
Fifecis of weeds

h_
Fegure 21.2 Moire crop ofecled by weeds

Weeds ure a'’so responsiple for causing the follow ng damage:

* Taking up ouinents, sunlight and rreeisture meant ter the plant/ecrop., Weeds
compete wilh plants for tocd. Ag a result, the Realty cf oa plant i in po
conditicn,

* Slow growih ale. Most weeds take Up more water trian other alants. THis also
Causes the growth rote of plants crops ta slot down,

© Inceong cullvalon costs The presence of weeds cclls for mere ane intense
cullvahon. This takes firme and money.

—-—or

|
Answer the following questions.
Write Tre False in answering tre folowing questions,
|. Pests and weeds do net threaten the healih of plan‘s. HE;
2. Cffects of pests include baking vp qihients ond moisture mecnt tar Plants. [4]
4. Pest damage can be so severe leading te yield loss and drought. [1]
4, Woeds slaw down the growth of alamts,
5. Weeds compete with plants far food.

Pest control

Pasts con be conirdllad through:
* Crop rotation. Rotating craps disruots -he recycle of sects and erisures therl

they do nal use craps as hosts,


--- Page 96 ---
Applying pesticides Pestis dis area cheraical rested which kills pests.
Encouraging insects that altack pect. shore ore some asec ts which cares mcr.
enemies [or oredalars} ofsome pests, For cxarpe J ladykid mats aphids anc
ih econ eat more than 40 aphids a doy. Refer Isack to Figure 21.1.

Ucing scarecrows for birds. scarecrows can be wselul in Cheasira birds crvcry
from feeding on crys,

Crop/Field scouting. This refers te walking ihrewgh a fichd observing gc
checking the density of pests on crops. This process he ps a formeér reacl in
(irnee before pesls multiply ard cause severe damages 1a crops.

Weed contrel
Weeds can be controlled wsirrg hese methods:

Cultivation Animoal-crawn cultvaters are Wsually used in dirmbocbwe, People
iollow behiad the cultivacor using hoes ta clear weeds belween craps. Thi: 6a
tot method of weed comtrno .

Hoeing. Weeding using hoes is ako commen in Zimbabwe. Closely sparec
crops such os groundnuts are usually weeded with hoes. This is a slaw metied
amch may require nany people 1 be effective.

Hend pulling. Weeds arc puled by hand ond gathered ourvtice the feld.
Bleugr7ing. Ihe land is ploughed osfore craps cre grows). Virgin land usually
requires ths methon of weed canto’. It fast and large fields are wooded
within a few haus.

Slashing, Slaswers are used lo cutsotband imicy weeds.

Herbicides. Weeck are killea wite chemicals colled herbicides, Tris method
is expersive bul igat and effective. Chemica’s are sprayed before the crap
is planted to stag the weecs from) germinating, Jpraying may abe oc done
wheel he crops are already growirig.

Activity 1 Practical

Rinding worect,
With the quidance cl your teacPer, go out 1a fhe fields te look for weects.

l.
> Drow the weeds in your exercee book and name them. y,

Activity 2 Educafional tour

Pol out one of cach weed you have found.

Visit a larm near You and crop scaul the farm.

Witte examples of the damage caured by the pest which you can see,
Which pestis resoonsible for the donmage?

4sk the farm cane what measu'es they Fave in place to coritreal the pesls.



--- Page 97 ---
Summary

* Pests include insect: and birds which attack crops,
* Weeds are Unwonted olents fiat draw and compete for putients sith plants.
*  Effecils ch pests inciude damage te mart parts, plant infections aed yield losses

ond drevonts.

» Effect of weeds incluce taking Wp nutnents mean: for the plan, gdow=ng down
the growth nate of plants angincreasing culfivation costs.
» Pests cor be cantrollod through crop rotation. applying pesticides, usirg
natural enemies of some pests and scarecrows to score cevay bers.
rF (Needs con be controlled so thot crops grow healthy. Culkvation i a feast
method cf contratling weeds,

4 Other methods af weed control are hocing, hand pulling, ploughing. slaghira

and applying hersicides.

(Glossary

External
Glance
| Fhotesy nhesis

Chicrophryil
Slomata

Flant reproaduction
Fertilisation
Nutients

Lagumes

Fransplanhiing

seedling
Side dressing

! Commodiiies

r

Broadcasting

Drilling

| Cabling

Germinotion
Pruning

Me

Mens OL Her.

fe take a quick look.

is Oo prgcess where plans use sunlight, carben
dianide ond water to produce toad ond oxygen.

is tne green colour in keaves.

are ihe tiny pores in lees,

is. process where plants prod ce offspring.

6 ihe joing of the male aid fenate parts oF plans.
are elernnents that ore necded far plat growth
are plants that produce pods with seeds and are
righ nm protein.

Ban dclohmeving a fully geroinoated seedling auc
Bling Tina perooanen location,

avery young plant grown frornca seec.

if the applecton of fertilisers in a circle crowed
individual plearits.

are any agnecullural praducts thai can be bough
or 4

is the scaltonng ot sceds by hand or mechanically
over alae piece of land.

io method thatuses aseed arill to sow the seeds at
groper depths and distance and then cover them
wih scl.

isa method of pulting a few seeds ina hole. made
at ined spacing ard depih using ad bale or planter
on very cflean oy hand,

is *he developmect of seed to plarit.

if ihe ramoval of dead ond avengroewn bravichies

from the wees thre woah caulthingy . .

‘

|
|

ra


--- Page 98 ---
'Woodlot - SS oroaressel aside: speciically for grewing trees.
Water-logging - os the flood ng of sel with wo tew.
Convenient - moons wel ploced and easy fe reach. ;
Herbicide - ochernicalsprayec toa kit weeds.
Pests - cre igecrs which attack crops. There are cilsce press" |
! birds. |
! Weeds - oo ore urpvanited! plonis that grow and cammpele lon |
nutriens wih cullwatect plots. |
Havoc - eins disaster. :

eee End of topic assessment —---

C1 owhatis ire nanre of le part labelled 2?
A. Rol B. Leal f. Flower D. Slem
2 Weotis the functor of the part labelled 4?
4&. To hold the plant upight.
B. To obsob water aod qutnents [ror ihe sol. .
C_ [ti where fertisahen tokes place.
RD. Toabserk light har photesynilresis. |
I
|
l

Multiple choice

Choose the comect answer.

3. Which part is resporsible tor manutaciuring food?
| B. 2 ca b. 4
Which part develops ira a fruit?
a. 4 BA. a Cc. Oo. 1
Which list has major plant nuteents?
4. Phosphorags, zinc. nitrogen.

Potash... oe neager.. Mangorese.

B.
Cl Ic, ran, Copoer.
im)

a

LA

oe


--- Page 99 ---
Ne

IQ, Chense 4 list eth methods of sowing wed,
A. Dobbling. Gibting and broadcasting
6. Onlkng, dibbling acd breadcashing.
©. Dubbtoling. drilling ane conching.
C. Drilling, cdiggnd and broadcastiig.
11, Which facters ae comidered when chocsng a wocdlatt
| AL file location, economy and the ooiice,
B. Climate. avai cble saace ord site location.
C. Pésl and disecses. luture considercstions and fencing.
C. Clecang trees, eacng ane clare.

4. Which nutrient doticiency is shown by o plant lech drying at the margin? \
A Mifragen KB. Peatassim C. Copper LD. Phosphorous |
Fr. Peck a legume from the vogetales bolow, ;
4. Polotoss B. Teoarica hoes h. Onions GO. Peus i
6. 2 re pests [hal atrack plerts. |
AL Aids CD. Bactenol wilt oC. Eorky olighl D. Leal mold
F i neta cereul crop.
AL Rice B, Wheat C. Groundnut. C. Maize
|

12, Whit is tha bene cf site localed near the main raced?
AL Tl euler io see customers coming,
B. fis casieria cL down and cary ees lo other cioces afer harvesting.
Co lis easier lo get help.
C. ltis eosier te mike triers.
13. foung Fees need féercing far .
AL protection tom damedvtic and wild animals
BR clacorotioan

. protectiay om fires
! a

MP making frees feei sole
14. Weick one © aimetiod ct cadroaling posts?
A, Monuring B Watering Cl. Crop otatian GC. Corrpast
lB. ae unwanted plants “hat grow dnd campete with cultivated plants
hor mitment.
A. Crops B. Weeds Cl, Fests D. Algae
Structured questions
Answer all the questions in full.
1, @| Give one importance of sach of ihe folowing nutrients in a ptord: Nilrogen,
PRO Ghoraus, Pobassiuen. [3]
GC) Name any tec mirror nutrients [2]
2. 4) In which secson no wheal greanin Zimboanwe aad why? [2]
G) Explain bow wheot is harves-ed, [3]
3. List any five mancqement practices OF a whe: crop. |5)
s. list any five factors considerad when chaasing a woodlot, raf
a. Listany two effects of oésts and ines effec s at weeds cn crags. [3]


--- Page 100 ---
Unit 22 End of term two assessmeni

4&. They go dor holicays with ther forbes,
B. They Burr thea flelas.
Co. They shart harvesting beer crops
D They sauakter heir acimmeals “or foesdd.
1S. Inmoawhieh sedsor is wheat grown in Fine boakeve?

| Cheose the comect answer.
fq. which of the follaxwing branches fecures on woodlots ard wild animals?
[ &. Forest y ana wilulile B. Animal production
| 02, Agrcultycai sconarrics D. Horheulrurs
Pe isa brarnich thatis concemec with tie Ousiness side of agrcullure.
| 4. Soil science B. Agr culhusal engineering
| ©, 4grculbvral economics D. Crap produchoan
.3. Tock should be shellered at ol times to
| A. keep therm worm 3. prevent wear urd lec
1 0) prevent thern frern werking well OD. alle thet
| 4. Wrich one ot trese lode i keptaao och oad?
4A. Hamerver f. Cre plough il. pods D. Hoe
| s. Which ane co lhese is a charcctenstic of a 3000 storage tocility for farm tees?
Po RACIST B. Calour C. Dorkness CO. Roofeo
| 4 Which colour code shows on extremely cangercis agrachemical?
| A. Green GB. Purple ©. Orage DB, Bloc
7 Formers could keep agrchemicas awey from the reach of children
bce
| A. [ney cre Sxperisive fo uy
| B, khev are posoroaus and aarntul
| [rey con pe -o9 aweet
D. children ore dangerous fa cherncoals
| B The —_ seaser 3 the coldest seqson with ne rainfall in Zimbabwe.
| A. bot ane: dry B coldarddry TC, hotand wel Dlcold and wet
| ® Whealde hawmners do dling ihe post rain secsoan?

4& Hot and dry scasan., B, AACN rain seqgar,
GC. Pes: roin secseor. D. Cold and dry season,
Ho Inswhich seasan is raze grower in Zenoah e7
A. Hot and dry season, B. Holand welseoson,
C.) Post roin season. DB. Clohd and dry season.
12. Name che ingtument that is used to measure rcinta l.
4, Rain gouge BA. Borst: The moneter OC. Wirid ware
2 WRECK instrument i¢ used to dete rune wind speed?
A, Rain gouge BR, Boromete;
c. —Terrnerne her Oo. Cup 2neriometear


--- Page 101 ---
| 4.

11s.

1é.

24

‘.

18.

22.

. Which of ihe following sels has the finest soil texsure?

Sail with encug7 nutrieits to feed pianss is ccled__..

\....
Toe ee

Witte h deo clinroatic Agetors are weed ta divide Fimbkatbwe into natuineg| farraing |
reqions? |
A, Rainfall and tenperature. B. Wind and humidiby,

C, Claud cover and temperature. D, sol type? ond wind direction.

WICK narural agian recerves the loweslanaunt of rainfall?

A, Regier | B. Region 4 , Reqoart 3 D. Regian 4

In wR region is specialised Farming practised?

AL Regimens B. Fegion 4 f Region | D. Region 3
Pick o weather 4lernenb irom the follow mg,

The avcrage cl observations and rrecsurements of everyday weather records
overdlang penoc of time & called _.

4. weather patterns B. chmoate

©. gebeal worming 0. lertipeoatre change
Wirt causes gichal cChonges in weather?

A Flies B. Droaghts ©. Farnotrid D0. cbel warning
Jwhie one ol the fel owingas neta sol component?

AL Water EB. AI @. Plastic D. Organic maker
Marie ihe soi compocent with ite bhigtes! propertion.

AL AI Bo Miner soaliicr

fl. Cingainics mittar Db. Woter

4, Jamperchure B. Autumn . Climare 0. Surmrrne:
|

I
we. Co |

What cages the born of wealhening shownin he picture?

A. Temperature change Fi, Freeeziagy

i, Plant gfowth D. Animal cctivity
The breaking down of packs loads to ihe formiogtion ot

A, mon_ments B.  seil

i, shapes OD, ofganic matter

The least fertile broe of sails ..

A rn B. scarid C, cloy D. silt

The orange mernt of sod particles 6 colle

AL Sl Shuto hure B. soil texture f, sailmesture Ch soil croasion

Aa. Olay &. Loam , Silt O. Sed

——_ — —___

A. ool uted sai B, eroded scl C. fertile sil CD. compost
Which ore is neta source of argemic matter?

4A. Tompaund B. Green maryure

) Coarnpost DB, Liquid manure |


--- Page 102 ---
a

og,

AC.

Lal

Cal
hp

ee)
Pad

a0

42.

dd.

45.

eogumés are rich it _

A. CPOs Ie Sus 2 peohassrr C coppe: O. nitrogen
The wiseing neoy of scilit colles
4. soil fertility G. saibercsian
£. 30i nanservaror TM wealherng
Which coe is mba agent cbsal arcecn?
A RLnning voler 8. Harrncdily (Il. Wind SAD ials
~Solercsonis bad because |.
A. cwishes awery parent rock B damages cops
 woshes cevdy the Ferine lop soi >. kills Wvestock
The adaitiae of toxic subslonces to tome sais celled --.
A soll erosier B. soleotltion
C. sailconmeryauen BD solrredificatice:
OWoich one of ihe following is a cause of soll pallut on?
A ACMING Terre, B. Plogghireg or ary sail.
Rumor of rainieg wasle. D. Use of ax-drenw implements.
“he sirking of woher otc the ground i cohecd ;
A infiitraticrt B. run-ott Cl precipitation OG. aeqpora ion
anata metagd of conse sig sol meistyre.
A. Eyoporation BR. Male hind G. Potholng D Marunirny

Polutesc water —_-

&. i cleadan ho drink

BR. as harmntul or toxic substances added ta tt

f. as beer. trecatecd

DO. qos nubieeits ‘or fish te rwiltiaty

Which of Ihe following is a téenible ethect of woter pollution?
4. Increases the rate of evaporation

BB. fasses droughts and Hoods.

CG. Seiases charge ci Queies.

C. Kis divestack and mases peooe i.

Meee the part of a plant thas okscibs seer and numenis.

Ao Leo B. Siem Flowers C. Roots
. The —_supoorts the plac cid transports nuliects to the: while: palcrr’.
Al loo B. sherri CC vlowers D. roots
Frits develop trom the _.
A leat B. stern i. thoewers GO. rants
The cuthent eaurird spasthy im chile pry 5 _-—
AL mivogen 6. pec aesur) C. Zire CD. copoes
— erirosiages gary roctand plant geawte ard quickens maturity.
4. Pelossium B. Mitrasyér Cc. Maaiganoee To. Phosphorous
whic hnoudrient is imoctart tor flower ferrrnatioern?
& Cappe B. Fhospheargus ©. Polassurni DO. Nitrog|en
Whalis the frst thing dane before planting a vegetable crap?
4. Lond peparatier. 8. Markey

= Faring 2 Tang care of ihe crops

ee ei —————— ee

—


--- Page 103 ---
i 4é, Which season is best sued tor tomate production?

~

A. Cole B. Worm C,. Ory DB. Wet
.47. Andredsetaside tarthe care aad mancgernent of forest tees called cari
; OA orchard B.fresh Cc. weodlot D. horticulture
| 46. What name ts given to on aren set aside For fruit production?
a. Field B. Woodlot C. Homicullure 6. Orchard
| 49 The culling of dead branches on fruit trees is called ,
A culfivahion B. ullaestation ©, deforesialion DB. pnuning

=* 4
; 1
1
1.
:
¢

DOG. Wridl are the affect ot what you sce ant1e picture?

A Wea compete with plans for nutrients,

EB. The plant will grow. welll,

C. Weeds will even ually dry out leaving allihe nulrie is to tne plant,
DI. Cuding of leaves and wilting of the plant

-

Section &

Answer all the questons in this section. Each question carles $ marks.

1. a) Sate any one value of agriculture. 11]
E) What are the funictans of each of the follewing branches cf agriculture:

|
 Sailscience
i. Animal precuction? [4]
2 8) Whatis tie difference between weather and climate? [2]
b) State the two major factors used te civide Amboabwe into nalural farming
regions, [1]
CO) How does rainfall aitect farming? (2
o Explain five marndgemernt practices cf awhedh coop, [5]
4. Eaplan five factors comidered when chasing a wondlot, [5]
5. @) What oro the characreristics of a Good sterage faciity fo farm tools? — [3
BY) Give two effects cf mishandling of agrechemizais. [2]
4. a) Give two climatic conditions in each of the following farming ragicns:
i Region]
li. Region [4]
b)] What is the cause Af climate change throughout -he word? Wi}
(30 marks] |

w 4

—_— my



--- Page 104 ---
— ——— - ee ns nee —————

Section B

Answer any twe questions, Each question caries 10 marks.
IF. odio. Lislany te commen agents of wealrrering. [2]
i. Descrbe how any ane agent in La} i. causes wectheriag, [3]
bi Descibe the pracess of compost naking (51
A. di. wWheatisio° sresien’ ij
|, Give ange cause of so] erosion, [-)
7. State any three elects GP sail eros. [31
bl List ary tou couse? GT scl pacllutior. [=
ct Nescobe toe polluticn 6 caused by any one of the cffects af 6b]. [33

ae Bad
oe
:

oa) i Nome ihe soil ridisture conservarion method sqown ir. the diagram. [1
i. How does “he method corserve soil rmoislure? [?]
ii, Mame lwo other sail mosture conservation metiods besdes tne one
shown in the diagram, [2|
oi. Whalare mica: plarl mutients? [1]
ii. Stale any twe Tinor olont nutioreds. [2]
i. Whit ic toe wee cl olagen in pants? [2]
ISoal i. List five importart routines chsérved wer arowing tomatoes. [5]
by i. Whert isc pest? [1]
i, Describe byvo ethects of pestis on plants, [2]
di. Hae com pests b= caatollod? [2]

[20 marks]



--- Page 105 ---
Animals

Unit 23 Introduction te animal study

JJ. slele proadvets are by-products of pouliry or ratstenls
i cengwuect poultry or robe hausing.

1
1
_

‘tn grade 3 you deci about the Rawsang systems for powdery and rabhits and |
the pwinents mccded by the dihercnt aniavals, In this unl you will discover the |
differen focds we get from hese ariinals.

— oe ee ee 5. —_—— —- —_---.---- eee eee oe

Key words i

product by-product

shicken egos Facies Wed om pc robb Ge oc

Fiqure 23.1 qa) Pouitry procuecds Cc) Soulty and rabbit by-proctueets

Products of poultry and rabbits

Animal products are tocd derved tram cnimals, torexcinple, mealis a product af
poultry and rabbits. Robbil meatis a geod source of prote’n and contains less fat
cormadreéed to other meats. Poultry alee produces eggs far hurnarn Cornsurnpter.

See Figure 23. la).


--- Page 106 ---
a

By-products

Pauly and ragbits abe cfher burners great Byproduch., A by-praduet 6 uany
materia: (heal peat do not eat that onginctes from arittals. Sorme af ihe by
procuets of poullry iicluide teothers and poulirg droppings. Feathers are used ta
mdee coshians and decorle jomea-colhing tarw in the clothing industry. Rulatat
fur is co a by-product which © used io merke clatning thems such as fur cacts wind
Rats, Both poultry ond wabsits oronwece voluicble manure rch in nithagen. Poultry
droppings can abo be processed io produce cote feed. Paure 23_ 1b) shows poetry
mand ratokt by-poroacducs,

Activity 1 Group work ‘

In pois, create a table and list produc s in one column. and By-praducis of
poultey ancl rabbits in anather. i

“ ee ee ee

Housing pouliry

Housing chicks

Figure 23.2 A braacler

Chicks are kegdunog breeder which as you recal frat "he previous yrs 3
a hected house far chooks. eralers are a cammoen hye of Bird kept tor nest,
Housing sor broader chicks should ensure that be chicks ave warn and protected
from jrecdatars so that they gneve oroperly. See Fiqure 23.2 which shows a breeder.

Constucting a broader

Matorial Used sa cansiuct a braoder giffer acco ng to ihe resouces 2 pernan
Faas. hee Inert thing iso ensure that the broocler provides food. waren ward
aad orceecton Per orede'o for the chicks,



--- Page 107 ---
~~

Activity 2 Practice] ie ~

tn qouns. cons uct a small node! of a breeda, Think of the imporance of
providing ihe chicks with woter food. warcnith ond pobechon. You can we any
ot these suggested materials:

Enclosure: Cardooord box, ploste bin

Water feeder Tunponvcdare tin. a cut water bottle container

Food feeder: Bowl. Wooden/melal! plashe contener

Food: Soa dust, ice grains, mealie meal
Lighting lor heading: Torch, stir

ee ”

j Answer “he follving QUES iors.

b ROUnTy Crd rons preduce moar asa _
| AL byepHoduc! Bo product C. hype G, moterial
t2, Whet sa by-praduct?
| &. Food trom an aint.

B. Ferod frorey pleats.

| CC MMaheriqls tiatenginake far animals buboarc net for purr carsumpetion.
GD. Powtry droppings.
2. A breeder shoud ensure that chines tava _
A. oweaber warnnth, food arid prolecton
| A, weber, Wise: cme) parctection
| C. food) wart? and curtains
| D. protector ond water

4. Why is 2 light on impaortan: feature ino Rroccter besides providing |
Aging? [1]
5. Shute org way inwhich poulbry droppings are used by people. [1]

Housing breilers

Chines will have full feathers after
four weeks ard fey can keep
themselves wear. Al this stage
they are transferred ta the deer
ltteer qouse. See Figure 23.3. a
deep litter Wouse Used to kee
breoilors.

Flauie 239 A deéecp litter house


--- Page 108 ---
a

A deem litter house foc Obed up sere which Uses concrete, wire mesh arid
roaheng material ter canstuctern The sahe beck of he walls usally Qurt facing
the prevailing wind direction to protect ?Fe structure and the birds fram strang
wins.

Loge scale Broder production reqvings more space wrch accommodates 2 lerge
number al orollers. A structure which alows for the dacammoadatian of several
oroders Should he approurrately 40en x 1Or. The igeders and drinkers should be
Onamnged in “ows sa that broilers have access 10 feec and wate: ot all times. Figure
24.4 shows alae scale broiler hose wile Figure 74.5 shows broiters recdy for the
market.

Figure 24.4 4 lone s00'e brober Wows

Activity 3 Educational tour.

Ge cn d field tip tod broiler lar near you. Gallery walk wilh he form guide,

Leck at the mateial used te Suild the decp titter houses at the farm,

1. Domuss and racare your obserahans.

2) Iintercect with the form owners and inquire on how the siructures were
moanastruc ted.

Exercise B

Answer the questions below.

1. Chicks are transferred to the deop liter hause otter 4 weeks oecause |
they.
A. ae ty ;
B, con keep therssiys worm
©. can make their avn food
a are ahwoys Tghtrng

2. Whick feature is rol preser ina dee iitter house?
A Wire mesh B. Roof (C. Door BD. Carpet

o

ir a


--- Page 109 ---
~

4. Ihesoidwallotc deep litter house 6 bulliacivga te prevailing wn cirection j
te
A protect the birds fram strarmg winds

i B. block thé su

C kee away “hisves

G. protect the bards trorq rats

id, Whotis !re ciference belweer a product and a by-product? [2]
1S List ary two pour precucts, [>|
Summary

«Animal products tater 1o food that is obtained from poultry and rabets, fer
example, chicken, rabbit meat and eggs.

© By products are moghenials ongnoding ‘rom animals ful cre act hor eahrg. for
iistance. eabh t tur.

* A Geoocde: should ensure that chicks hove worth, water, toad and protectian
tram GSeciqabors.

* 4 deep litter poultry house is a structure for mousing larae scale Ereilers, It i5
Lalo continu Ped using wire 2esh, rkcks and cscestosarcithasanentance.

-—


--- Page 110 ---
a
Unit 24 Animal nutrition

| lL define o bukaiceed det
7 state tunctions af esseniial pubes whch constite @ kdlanced dict

Foshbock nn ee in

|
! !
Pecap the dctindian of the tec in pars. |
| — . lS on |
oT 0°. :.:.:.:.°0°0°0....0.0.2?.?.:>:°:x.'" 0 SaaS Tos

Key words

| boatencec et sup ler erils J
A a

Balanced diet

A bolanced diets food Ihat coctans a pacessory nutnents nihenr corect amecunt
needed for qed health. Just as wilh hornans, setcllanimals ake need @ bolanced
qiet to martain good health. Its imoortant for acinnal foed ta rove nuinenis such
a3 Gabohydeotes, proteins. Falk. ole. roareéra salts ard vitamins. Fiqure 24,1 below
shows pelacs Of poulty feed.

Figure 24.) Poullry feed

Functions of different nutrients

Nutierts in shock feed are provided in varying quantities, Wale carbehydreides
make Up he bulk of stock eed. proteins are fo nme in érricaler cpacariities 108) cme
minerch are provided as supplements. Supptemcnts arc products rich in cerlain
nutients whieh olhensie lace rile available feed. Farmers should moicke: sce
“head feed Sough! “corm animal ieed stares adds nunihonal value to thie diet of the

arimals.


--- Page 111 ---
Activity 1 Word Scramble | OO ‘

[Unsecrarnt @ the following letters te find out-which nutrient they ore,
al dinero

ib) tsironpe

c] tas!

dd) fievarnia
Bl be rohed ysara

!
me SS “

Carbohydrates

Carbohyordtes functicn as an energy provider that support the Breathing anc
movement ob rmscles in anirmeals. This energy is Oo imperkant ter aniraal growth,
producing egy: ard chicks in chickens. Animals ake get body heat far waraiin
{rom Garhi roahes.

Proteins

Rotem oravidie the building blocks for lhe body tissue; repainng old tissue and
growing née tisue of animas, Withoul adequate proteing, the growth of anirna.s
is disturbed. Proteins abo aid tre buwlding Lp and production of reat in poultry.

Minerols

There are several mines required by onirmals for good Peal ard thee micpor cares
ore celcium, phosohorus ard soctum. Minerals are important in providing rmatencal
for he grew hoot Bones, teeth and bssue ond the for ation of blood cells. Minerals
are provided in the form af supplements cs they are ow in grains.

Fats

Fats ore necessary even though they are cocde;d in small arnouns in poullry, Pots
help corboaydroates in providing and stoning esta energy and providing body
Frc".

Vitamins

Just as with Fors. vitarnins ore neeced in sraal cmaunts, Yitamins are éssentiqal far
Ene body ta tunction normally. Biels actually protuce tone vikaming on Their owen,
for axcrnole, Vihamin C. Same vitamins are orevided far birds a5 supplemionts.
Vitamins prevent ond conboal diseases and ad food gestion in pouliry,


--- Page 112 ---
rail

Activity 2 Educational tour aaa

lwisit a frol é: or raobit farm near you wth your tec+cher.

a) Acquire poernrnssien For thie torn guide to take samples of the ciffererit srock
feeds cq able.

rey GScuss in greups naw the citterent “ceas cantibute ta a balanced cet.

Ic] 4ck for permission ho Peed the ooulyyrcktoits Form the far quice.

| Answer the questions. |
jt. List the five 2sserihal nucaeants hot rake oa bolanced det for poultry. [|
13.) Give one junction cf carbohydrates. [1] !
1a) How does protein deficiency atfect poultry? 2] i
'4 Inwhel way ore fois similar ie Carbohydrates? (11
5. [Pa brd is suttenrg trom seven diseqses. which mulrient & probably

missing Porn its cher? [I]

summary

» 4 balanced ciet for small livestock & cogde up of odequate amounts of
carbohydrates. orotemns. miccrals, fate aod visareins,

« Carhahydraes supply enedy ieeded by livestock ho cerlornm several func thorns
SUCH Os moving, Breathing and keeping the cnimal warn,

¢  8roteing are importa os they previde bulding blocks for the body tissue for
eecultry,

* MAinerais also fon Ihe oscential mers wih alc. poknaspherus ond sadiuim
being the major miners. Calchiniis needed fer bone formectior

* Vitamin anid fate are neeced in small omourts and are Usually prowded a5
Sup emer ts.

* Vilornins prevent clisea5es while ‘ots belo in previcing energy and heal.

+.


--- Page 113 ---
Unit 25 Small livestock

1.

define o porcasite
2. idenhly parasites aad diseases hat affect poultry or robs
3. suggest appropiate methods of ceantralling porasies and disenses.

i

Flashback (is

Sriall livestock i imporlar becowee of its products such os meat ane eqeys,
‘Hawever, the heclth of smalllivestock is under throat beca ise of parades and
| deere

-

Key words |
Va pearasite Feast dewaornring quordnitine |

Parasites and diseases in poultry

Pecltry cad tall victim te parasites in ihe cnvironment. & parasite is an organism
whith dives anorona Aes ond uses ihe Frost for food. A hostis an caimioal thet
porarte lives and “eeds an. Two groups of parasites common ry affect moultry.
These are nleral ond external paras tes,

Internal parasites

Rounhwomns and tapowerms ore the mol cormod intersal porages whica
fect poulry, Roundworrns ard tdceworrmrsé ore shew wn Figure 25.7.

Figure #5 1) Roundworns Bh Tape aor s

Round worms
These wars have araurd oody and they ve nthe ral itestioes af paultry, |r


--- Page 114 ---
a
rentraled. thay wan rmiulliphy very Quicks;. Bras wilh (ol ndwaris SFiOw Sy rriprcrrs
suck cn reduced copoehte, weigat loss cmd in sari cases dicurhpeeet,

Tape wortris

Tapeworm are flatshoped aro while ncclows, Poultry with tapewearrrs Olga facie
diearerged and ios of appetite, Tope wernns can casse daaih of poultry if hey are
oe cortra led.

External parasites

The ee main external poraytes af poollry are teas. ico and leg mites.

Flecs

Flens feed by sucking tia blead ef ther host.
They attach lheriseles to the como. wortthes
and eyelids of poultry. Growth is slowed down
and egg product on is recuced iin peu try with
fieoas, Flan usedly insrecdse in numbers ane
cause ulcers an the skin caf poultry. These ulcers
reouice ihe quality of the meat produced.
Figure 25.2 shows cf fowl Mess.

Fignce PAP OG feat lee

lice

lice are greyish in cclour ard choy attach
themselves io “he foody, head and wings ot
hirds. Birds are carstantly scratching, egg
production is reduced ard grawlh ala slo
down. The singular forra ef ling is Ques. Figure
25.35 shows a louse,

Scaly jeg mites

$caly lea mies are red in celour and hey
arach thenselves bo tac scales on ihe lege of
no, Wry. Bads are ochweys scratching ard ther

ag arc paola. Iniaying he, 20g prod lchion
5 decacsed bocauss of laq rics. 4 scaly leg
mite is shaw im Figure 25 4,



--- Page 115 ---
~

Activity 1 Debate | ;

Form groups and depaie on whch porasiles cause mene harm ta culty
hetweeninlérrialaid externa parasites. Keepin mind the effects of each by pes
of parasite or the quality of he poultry and its woduch,

SSL

Exercise A

Answer the following questions.
Jl. Wheatis o ocrvasite?
© 0 AL TP anmorgarim without a ploce Io Wwe
B. Ar organism whiet lives in croer a host,
C. [his a best.
D. his cin arerral that is fected.
2. Which is on exargle of cn intemal parasite?
AL Loube 3. MIB . Roundworrn OD. Flee ;
(3. The 3 main external soarasites: of poultry are
, A, fleas. lapevrarms acd poyndwarrres
B. fleas. dice and topewerrns
&. thens, lag mites ac worms
D. teas, ite ond leg mites
14. Whatcre some of the syrnplormns of a bine affected oy leg rites?
ij A Cansiant ruaning and increased apoe-ite,
3. Cons-ant scratccing and swelen logs,
C, Woes on skint rit swollen cyelids.
DO. Less clappetite and diagnose.
Wid is fhe diffe-ence bebveean a parasite and a host? [1]

"a

Pie]

Activity 2 Research

11. DMide inte difforcnt grcups: have seme groups look into the rearing af

| Poultry, Grid the offers the reaving of rabbits.

©) List Whe tfages of bringing up poultryrabbits bo micrturity (racing). Take |

| cote of Ihe differant nutritianal and snelter needs ot cach stage, l

DB) LseiCl fools of your cnaice to make slides of your findings. If you do not

| have access to the resources needed. cul and paste pictures Fan
Magnes of Hew. oones on cordeoard boxcs,

Control of parasites

Parasites Can be controlled ‘tiough treatment. this mears that a farrer takes
aston when line parasites have already taken nast and ore mtecting the Aaalth

of the curds.


--- Page 116 ---
Prevention of oavesite3

Preyeqotive mrOdsures on parasites are ways of dealing wilh porasiies before
they shar cowsirg preblerrs tor the Bwds. Prevenlian ensure: thot parasites never
Ike Feod im the Ends.

Contral dnd prevention cf intemal parasites

contol Prevention

Cewermlng- the is grind o Practsing safe hygiene, Keep the chicken
drug ioari animal to getid of house aid tre feeders dry and clear. This
parasites. because parasibes thtive in dirhy and deoerys

SOV IPO rr erits.

Ava overcrowding.

Alternate chicken heuses,

okite aria inpect néw birds Getore adding
them ta the o'hers.

Lbse apple cider vinegar. This strengthens the
fiahting Ghonce of ards against bacteia
and warns. Add one leasp oan per litre to
water tor the birds,

Contrel and prevention of external parasites

Lisinfécting the chicken house Provide Gusting areas or a dust bath for
with poultry dip while heating the birds. Chickens naturally fight off parcsites
oaultry wilh: aoultry dust. from their feathers hrovah dust baths,

Spraying equipment wilh .
chem cas such as mokatheart.

Dipping chickens in parattin.
Renoving and buming deep litter,

Apohing engine ail ta weat cracks
in [he chicken Nose,

Activity 3 Educational tour -

fd. weit brailer cr raotil fawn neo you with your leacher. Ask far permission

Yo fram the farm qu de le guide you “hrovab inspecting Ihe animals far parasites

aI diseases.

a) Ask how often checkups should be dons,

ot Note down some of thesymptorn of acick bid orrabhil Porexample,tust .
aswith human 2 sick rd is ens ahve.



--- Page 117 ---
Exercise Bn ce

Answer fhe questions,
1 Wepch ef Ire folowing 6 neta wey of controling exter paraiites?
4. Splashing haled water in the coicken house,
4. Gapping thickens in parattin.
C. Removing ard burring deeps ier,
- Crinfecting the chicken boise witr poultry dip.
2. Jeworming is
é removing woes from an cnimral using your hand
a. aig aay tea anitrel "a Get rid of warms
o. cLtticg an an mal we ta ceneve weorres
Co ereying an animal to chisse geveay wore
os Explain the differance betwood cortalling ond preventing pearcasites

Tan els, 23
4. stale any oe method of coentraling external porasites. a
3. Give ony cre method of préveccing interval parasites. ‘1.

ee ee ee eee ee eee ee

Common adkeqses aot small livestack

Olsease ‘Symptoms ECGrtrel
floaccidiosis * Diarhoes = Treat drinking water
© Broppiregs with blood + Use feecs with
* Loss of oopetite coccidio stat
= Birds cre + Killintected biros
Heweostle « DGcharge of Tues * Quarantine atfected
oy Treat rath birds
” . « Legs paralysed = Kil allinfected birds
i = Breads oie

wpa

*

+ Sneezing Add «torr A to
© Dschage from the ayes feeds

; * Swallen faces * Vaccination

XY 1 Lack of appettte Trecal with ciruigs

MB: To quarantine is to io ote infecced orimals from these wh och ore rat infected.

ir a


--- Page 118 ---
ral

Summary

© Poullry is ¥Linerable «cc ileal extern Gearasiles,

* Ro neon ged tapcaconms cre eeomples ar interncl parasites wroile flecs,
ce aad leg mites aré éxtonial porate,

© Poultry wth Paternal porcsites inse appetibe suffer from diarhoaeda avd iose
wel get.

© Polity wth external pduis tes mangsgrihy scrqich and cepencnce oO decree dis
Ineqe) orodchon.

‘ Peversites are cantrolod treugh treatment. Porasites con aan be reer ced
nefare they Lake bast anc alfect the fevalth of bres.

* Bred canbe reatod for internal ocaaires through ceveorrnirig.

© anbernal gorasites Cor bee peevonted through practising safe hyqene, avciding
ove cred ng and isslaliig and inspecting meeey Girds.

+ Piinfectng the chicken house and treathng poultry vita poulirg Gust work a5

tracdment for Setemica pecs.

Providing; dist Goats for birds hélos ihe gel id ol ete nd paras‘les ot tr eir
own behore Ihe gorocites tac Ast.

Ceo\erdiosis, Newccslle avd Fowl pox are tre mas) corumvan disecses tial
affect small livestock



--- Page 119 ---
Unit 26 Apicature

HMeartity materials needed im canstructng bee hve

1,
P2. consticl bee hives

Ingrade S youlooked at the different natural and artificial bee hives. Listsome ;
OF ihe tyoes of artiticicl bee mses you still remember, 5;
DO Key word
a arkt cic
Ae ;

AAtateren yi eer toe elrisucth & bee hive

Arhficial bot hives are man-made hives wich mace use of different materials,
The matheriq used should! be bee-fmendly, and alsa make it easy to harvest Inte
horeyconbs wren the tine comes, A beekeepernmusl aba keep in mind the ces:

when Choosing the material te use.
Merterat used

Bosker! hive Slrawtlype of grass for weaving baskets]

Type of artical beehive -

Sark hive A bark
Rape/string



--- Page 120 ---
Activity 1 Practical —

Tap Gar Fett Tirrber Any wooo Whe wood msl be

lermite-prcoact)
Mca

clay

Pore? Wicd
hicals

in oardups. cwcote a ype ch hee hive and Wat dower Ihe rosterials you will
decd bo midges that nrve.

Moet use of The infenet te help you come up sith o désn for your chosen
heoh vs. Grow the design in your books.

Corshucta model al your nee hive. Tou conse the internet to find GI see

hive models. Fo acrnple. you car re her he tens sé: bithosse ew Ghaow, orn, ;

Ai sc hool-orajont birt

fou cenvalse visit local bockcoper in your cred ond gel decs from them or |

how bei bes direes are mode.



--- Page 121 ---
Answer the questions below.

1. Whar is an artificial see hive? (1
| 2. Lt che moteria. usec: to build the following boe Hyves:
| oO] top bor hive

Bi wor getrath bye

| ©) bark Wwe fa] |
4. state any twe factors a beckeever carsiders when selecting misterials te. |
i mcke o beschive.

— i —_—_ _ ee

Summary

* A col nec hives are me-mode hives which make use al chhereri matericay.

*  oiferect bee hives make use of varying Mmateriols. Basker hives make wse ot
siti tO rmmake “he boskets. bork hives use tree Gerke. op: ear hives use limes
Ghy wood Ind nals, clay hives make use of clay and the Laneystroth hive asses
PING wecoad and nabs ag the mag ieslic§,

* Beckeepers should keep in mind the cast of the moteral ard alsa rmiqke sure
the material ssed makes it casy te remove the honeycomb: trom she Aye.

‘Glossary \
Products - tod derived tram animes, Fer Secmiole, mice isa proce:
of poultry ond rabbits.

By-product © Maternal that ceome da net eal that oiginates from
daninic's,
|Eolanced diet - food thet contains <i necessary niltienis in they conraet
| amauril needed for aood Feclta,

IUpPpieMments © Pfod.ets nich in cectain nutrienis which otherwise tack in:
| the available feed

Forasite - arorganism which lives in or ona hest and uses the mast
far hood,

Host - a animel that a parcsite lives and feeds cn.
Dewarming - ging G dwg fo Gn onmoal to getridl of parasites.
Artificial something thet is tian-mocde. f

~ End of topic assessment ——..

I
| Multiple chaice
| Choose the covect onswers,

I. Give tne meaning of the rerm Poultry oreduce,
; 4. Food acttaiaed frorn poultry, BK. Woste of pacity. |
. Cm. Eggs. D, By-product.

----. —_—— —_—__—_-. —__ -_—__ =

a


--- Page 122 ---
2 Acbuclucg for ceeaing chicks 6 calles a

AL penhusus? B, secnel
i dioep dilter douse D. brooder
24. Aoglaiceddiathas  -.
| a, corbohyorcsles coc faith
Bo cares ude rats
Pt ihe autres in the carmect anv
DB. all Ihe ny. triers
4. ._ — build bedy tssuet oe cima.
A WitCoirs B, Probes . Fals Do Mairerals
5. Parestes con be grouped init nrc pHoMa eS
AL Piesaaland olotal KB. regensland exlernall
T) oniensshand exter D. onside ond cut
| 4. Which one of tie ‘ollowing is a7 excryple of cain extemal parcsihe ob poucry?
| AL had B Sealylegrmite <2. Masquite LG. Roundworm
Fis qawoy of iwecaiag oowdry wetich has external parcesates,
4. Dappirg chickens in parcttin B. CDawarming
C. Peachsing sole hygiene Ce Burning down the chickert Frese

2 Weck of the following is neta conrimon cisccse of sriall livestock?

A. (Coccichods Bb. Newndstle disemse
ffl) Chicken pate DL Fowl pos
°? Asymplorm of Concidasig is...

4 discharge of rrescus B. sneezing
0, swelled “ace CG. droppings with olcrod
STdoWhich rreaterial are ysed co consiuct a top bor hive?

A. Tirmeber aid mais. B. Straw ard clay,

C. Aboark and rope. b. Trber aned clay.

Structured questions

‘Answer cill the questions in full.

ve ony two exarmicies of poeullry proce ts.

State any ore by-product ot r¢bbnis.

Wal ae tbe benefits of a braoder to caicks?

Why are minerals importar’ in fie oiel of Poultry?

Whe is the diffeence bebeeer internal ard external parcsites?
Give ony tores ways of preventing internal pecinasitss.

Weyis itrecommended 10 kill Girds infected with Cisecses SUCRI as
f 0 Coerciclosis and Newcastle?

Lsbony tee foes af ori cial bee hives.

“ae on De Gd he

Fa

[2]
[¥]
[2]
[2]
td
]

[é]
[2]


--- Page 123 ---
Urb ge bors aa chinery

1. Mole uses OF fear crc barney
2 Classy trachinery os cnirial or engine deer.

In ihe previous grade. you locked ol Ihe uses at different forn implements.
REI NarCups on wheal you learnt.

Key words

oenmte éticeant complement pesicides

305 of farm machinery

Perm mochiieay Gomperbont te a terrier ceeccse ia Wwsecd Tey mary Out marry
tasks. Klose farm mocking varies in tyes and models, fer example, there ae o
humber of cffere id lypes of nicugns

7jough

There are types of ploughs which clude ihe disc. rotary, mould boord and chisel
Plough. Plovahs arc imporlant because [hey open up and aerate the soil, Tao
merate is co ollow ato ener deenintoa the sei A ploughs used far preparing ihe
sail for sowing. A Plough ovortunis sail, banging rich soil from undemecth onto “he
sidace, Thit creates @ good foundclian for sowing seeck. Plowohing alse allows
raintalt fa infitate deep inte the soul, Figure 27.1 shows a tractor dices disc plough.


--- Page 124 ---
Pagaie ZL A ber sa. drawer da poet

Cultivator

A cudiveatoris very valuoble in remcwng weeds m tre Add one desply loaserning
soil, This also helps wale ta sirk deeper into fre sail, The diaquarrs below shows on
ox crown cUlalor ang anengine divert culevater.

eo —--—--—-

Figure 27.2 G) Gu Ge -cinces Watins a oAn engine diven cubiratar

Harte

Typos at havrows include soke Fre drag
ame dio harass Yorrows ara ued fo
Brece scul unos. Unlike the plough and
co livator whicn oo deen inta the soil,
the Saree concentrates cn toe surface
oiahe sail, & harow smromhers a1
evels [ve tield. A spike sarow is stow
Ty Figure 27.2.

Ooyndave bayperiuy



--- Page 125 ---
Rianter

Pranting 8 Wsualhy cored out very fest
when a Glanier is usec. A plornler can
do many tasks of the same jime. It
CON open 2 ferrow for sowing seed. [1
appies fertiliser, droos tis seed and
lasthy covers The seed. All this is dane
In One aperctian, The planter sheeen in
Ficgure 27.4 [5 ox-drow'.

Combine harvester

4 combine harvesier is cn example ef
a eacearnn specfic and efledent tracter
sore fame we. To be efficiert is to
Breduce she rmrost usng tae least effert
Or resources. this mache con perfor
three tasks nm ome: harvesting. aosening
the ectiale carts o 2 crop aid cleanirg
ean cans. Figure 27_5 shows a corinne
hoarvess BF

Pump

Pumps or used to draw waler from
boreholes. dams anid rmvers. Scme large
ccdle farrné use irriaatar ig complement
seasonal rains and dung dry seqsans,
To 2omplemerr means to make up fer
G sharage in something. Mosk imigatias
TWetens howe porns ol ihe centres af their
Broge Tunc hearing. Soe Figure 274.

Figure 2? é an isigation sythent gees a purripy

sprayer

Sprayers can ether se big machine operatec or small equipment thet can be
operaled cy mand. 4& koopsack sprayer is gn example of a smell sprayer. Sparcay ers
are Wed to opply pesticides on crops. Pedicides are chernicas thal prevent or
desroy bess. Care should o¢ taken io ansure thot the user does not get inleo
cortec’ wilh the cher cals being used. Figure 27.7 shows o knagsack (prayer gnd

O Wig; hela Ssporeyer.

i a


--- Page 126 ---
APOpIoskh wp,

MLOW EF

aust as th sprayers. mowers can bo either dea er seal. The mast Commo srl
mower you probably know "5 cl lawn mone. Mowers Cot grass or craps Ih rows,
For example, Ihe schol graunas are kept clear by CMdtiag grass with oo kowr
cower, Big lew” mowers are pulled by tractors, ana they cover a lorge aracir a
chert time. decdvy duty rowers Cal cereal crap arid aronge grass or hay in rows.
Hay ¢ cutand died ovateral from the field which 6 loler Used as animal teed.
Fiz). 27.8 shows alown mower and a og mower,

: ote moar tas

Arrange a trig te ge ardsee the nechicery mal found of school,

1 Sote down "he mec ainery you see.

2, Check ageing: the machinery you learat on. Ge they hove similar Price Sess 2
4re the ragchines advacced cr ole nedels?

3. Draw any machinery cf your choite and state wer itis useck tar,


--- Page 127 ---
Exercise A §f

Answer the followlng questions.
C1. Ploochs are important becouse hey

(OAL Oper up aad oerote soil B. cul gress
: @_ infiltrate the soil D level ‘he field
i Which of the fotlowing i an exampie of an efficient and modern tractor?
| A. Enoasack spraver B. Micwwer i
0, Carbine tarveester D. Gise: plaugh
Pa. Which of tne folowing is maton exanple of Jarre. macninery?
A. Plouan B. Tracie: ©. Punter CD. Mower
What are purips used for it tarmiag? [I]!
a. Why should o penon avoid coming inta camtact with choticals wary |
spraying? [1].

-

Classifying farm machinery

eee lee ee ee J

Farm machinery can oo classified os animal or enqine driven. Animal riven
machirery ss machinery which depends on cnima!l power in order ta move
meachings onc moke them functional. Ergine driven nackinery uses GVIpiress
Foomoave machines and make thom wark, Table 27.1 shows sore Bacriiples of
mechines chat use ainda power ond offers which rely on engines to luncfios,

“Aube 27.i Chewy atign of diferent barre machinery

Plougr Cambiae harvester
S-drown cultivator Sra ver
Plalwer RASC ArEAr
Hiomow Pure ps
Treacter

Activity 2 Educational tour. Sa - ‘

Visita big farm near you. Ask fer permission from ihe far guide to take an ;
Uirventory of Ibe fom machirery they have. |
I Ase The farm manogers! fo show you how they keap back of af thet
rachinery they Powe. |

2. Use IT fool Ic present your results. you de mat nave occess to a |
f  Gemouter. simply wrile down your findings. .

i

a — see “


--- Page 128 ---
rd

Summary

+ Ploughs are weivhie opedng uo and aeraring “he sal

© Aculivatorrenrcves weeds and loosens [hie fr.

*  boress cacceniroate an masing ihe tick level,

» A£Arcomb ne harede Gon exaviple of a raccoa and it harvests. lagen: adie
meats ota cos and cleans Grats cries.

© Purp draw water fram boreholes, davis ane riven. Ar wigation syslern rehles
Od pump.

» Soroyers ae used toe apply pesticides Im crops

* Mowers cul grass dirdsene can amaige the crags in res,

© Fara macdinery can be classified as animal or engine driver.

- . mre,

(Glossary |
: Aerote - ta dllow arte cnter deep inte lhe sci
| Effie lent fo preduce [he mostusng Ihe leas! effort or resQurce, |
hod ef - nearly ple.
‘Pesticides chemicals lhal provect or des iay pests, |
Camplement Ic rake wp foro sheartage in sqmethineg. :

” —_— —_———§ ———_ -—-

ee. _ End of topic assessment Hae.

Multiple choice

Choose the comect answers.

Pi, 4 camming hoarve:te

fA. fTiQews gras, sprays pests and o.. mips waler

Bo hoes, logsernt ecichk park ala crag. aid cleans grain craps
 lewels the fleld

CG. genahes the sol

i 2. Whar is Ihe Use ot sprayers in agriculture?

A Toe make iné arsmeh pleasaa, 3. Ta keeu ibe are css.
IOC. fo gpcly pesicidde: on crops. OD. To kill aests.
io. wre dra some of the tases of a planter?
. Cpens o fare for sow ng seed, applies teriser and drops the seen,

5 Harveslé arg lansens adisle parts aba crap
& Pemaves weeds ara loosens he sail.
Ta. Irrigges tess thee fel.

4. Forrnars se inqoation becouse
A, oitis chica
Bo irey wand lo be tances han other barmers
7

hey wont to use ops weiter (ron res
il juogleaments roinka | shartages



--- Page 129 ---
ao —— a EE

a ‘
Vo. Chooses a rrachine that i¢ net asimel cdiven From {he list, |
| oA. Pune B. ouch Co Planter 3. Cultivater

6. Which one oui of the lollowing is net an example of an Banging driven Farm

. tmmochine?

f oA. Cutiveter BL Sprayer C. Wheelbotow G6. Planter

Structured questions

|
| Answer allihe questions in full.
I

——— 1 eC—="»n

1, List ony four esanip'es ot far machinery. [4]
lo. Whal is the differance in use between a plough and eo harrow? [2]
3. Which ferm machire removes weoss are loosens scil in cep tti? Jt]
I4. How if o Danter an efficient machine? (2)
6. Listary four oneal drove machines. [4]
46. Mome) any one engine driven mach phe. [a]


--- Page 130 ---
Agribusiness

Unit 28 Agribusiness

1. idertify nations! merkeis far ag icultural products
is orepare come and expenaituee of an aareu'tyral Sr torprise.

What is a soles recarcl? |
1 i
I

oe ee ee eee _ oon 4
Key words .

i depot onherpise  fxecd costs direct costs ing tt |
en coslexpondilure |

Notional markets

Nerienal markets buy agicultural procucts throvghout she country. Tere are
copes in small towns and growth ponts where farmers market their proach. ots.
4 depot koa sicrage clace for large quarvitigs of qogds. Natiandl markets care
4 goloming for the farrier cs vhey sellic a wider marke compared to a farrier
sallng an higvher own, Exarnp es af nahena noarkets ore:

. Sain Marketing Soard (MB)

» Catco Holding: ried

» Conboged Zirnkokbewe Limited [DeL!

a Tobocce indusky Marketing Board (TIMB,-

F.qure 28.1 shows tné Cron Marketng Boor silos.


--- Page 131 ---
Figure 28.1 Groin Markefing Board silos

Marketing

These are factors farmers canker wher rearketings their Crops. Farmer research
on posi markets for ther crap and compare different price: Offered by citterer
ouver Thisas important in masing sure borers ger profit fom their CHL,

Fanrers do se ihe orice of (heir agricul ural procuce ox a markeiing taal. Ths
higher ihe grace at the crop. the mare interesad ihe Cirvers are in purchasing the
ono, ad varying price cifers.

Darren market crops ho national makes suc GMB bomouse G hatensl market
mas the capacity io muy the crocs in bulk. Gn4B has ‘he Muscle lo then sell the:
proguce to the whole country, There are also priverte Compeanes i Lirobakyes
which play on impertant role in buying and Morketing agricutural produce, These:
Inglvde Agrifoods, National Foods and Millers.

Sources of income in an agricultural enterprise

Tismportant for on agiculural eqlerprise te have many ways of getting incame,
An enterprise is o business or project. A helpful tip is to v ev every qvaloble rasauree:
on the torr a3 a pokenicn source of income.

selling by-products

AS learnt gare on in Tapic 6 there are diferent oy-praduc’s acquired frorr
livestock. The folowing carn be sald depenaing on which livestock the Farmer i:
reanng and crepes (hey are growing:

= seecdhnigs

* becswaox toe conde pagkerss

*  arure from all iveshock

* Tooter feathers [they are popular with creafbers|

>  fObBEHt furffoshian industry]

* Cowhide [leather for the fashion industry]

«ower s [ho fishers for boil.


--- Page 132 ---
eCus rine ceswth ce Fanner
Ligure 28.7 Sore selolele by: neodiacta

Hiring out equipment/machinery

Hang oof some mechinesy curing off season car brngin extra mangy indice crs
snteronia. For cxample. ihactors and mowers Cor 6 hirecl out ie other businesses
‘hol need Ihem. Cauhen should be exengsed to make sure fae machinery is
fatLrnec in qaad caraitvon.

Utilising other skills a farmer has

Poople are usually qood af merc than one hing For example. same formers
aie not nee@e to jource out building services for their strict uines. Theade who rw
architectural skills can offer cerns ruciian services ta ciher farmers Or new formers.
For example cesvigning ond consisting breeders and coep iter hewses Brings
In eatrd money.

Hosting classes or consullancy services

[ven ian indwidual does incl have teaching or consulancy expenence, nis her
esneriene 3 in agniculiire can be chorec! with others whis wish to start on sqrculturai
enterprise. This canbe done cata price. Ineveby binging o former extra ieee bd
Figure 28.3 shows a farmer shoring her expertise in faring with others wicking to
verture inte faring.


--- Page 133 ---
oe als er eld

"gure 48 9 A toreer tharing her knowledge
capenses in an agricultural enterprise

Fixed snd direct costs

The mojo aperse3 inary business cen be divided inte fixed and direct ces}.
Fixed costs ore oxpenses an enterprseé has and must pay wether or rol ib is
Progucing. Far example électic-ty bills. ron and wages must be Paid whether rl is
Q farming season or nat, Direct cests on the other hand are costs whICH arise a5 cy
resul of ihe productan the enterprise does, For exdriple. ihwe buy birds, we meecd
To factor in tne cost of chicken feed for the birds in our ezpensas,

Other @xpenses5

A farme? can get a lean to boost the enferorse and will save Mo pay Eeack Bnet
rene with interest, This is called @ firicincieal Cost. The farmer also takes mane;
fram the businass to support hirrnselffhecsell and ris/her tarnily. This 1 an excrrpsle:
of o personal cost.

Answer the questions below,
1, Which one of the following is neato nerisnat meaket?

_ «Grain Marketing Board B. Cotteo Holdings Limited

;  & Cily Council 0, Gartiberd Zimbabwe Limited

2. Woatis Ihe advantage af using rational marxets for farmers? |
A, Trey are smal. B. Naiiongl movkets con reach more people. |

.  &. hahoral morkets ae close, DL Novioratmigrkets ceil for farmers for frec, |

3. Where ore cotton products sola [1]

4. Slate anc explain teo ways a farmer canmake extra lateral =§ [2

5. Whatlis the difference between fred cost and direct cag: [2],



--- Page 134 ---
income and expenditure

Wercn we Plant mdze, wo keep records of things which we buy, We Ly irertis
couch os seeds, fertilisers and chernicals for controlling pests ara disecses, We clea
resercl Ihe cos of transparting seeds anc ferlilsars to the school Money sacnt
sn purchasing inputs is calec Input cost or expenditure. Alter selling the crcepss.
we have our relurms or income. Table 28.1 shiaws the expcnditure and income
acco urd for te move crop.

ras 2k | Expendilure ond inmame for ge production

returns

Now S S0kg Lime $ 12.00 Febld Sale af green § 120.00
25 kg maize seed $ 25.00 mice s
LaCkg ammonium $105.00 Aor 12 (Grainforfood $f 450.00
ni roe Gain to GMB
ldo «gq Compound D 400.00 May 1] rain for #1 000.00
$key cherckcal $§ 12.00 ay 9 poultry leed $ YOO.00
Transport % 40.00
Ploughing $ 2O00
Lobe $1 FOAM)
Total return $2? 470.00
Loss tohal cosis
Profit or loss 5? 034.00

Activity 1 Group — : NS

Suey Table 2#.1 narcups and use illo claw up on ineut and returns account
for your Tzize arcject at school, Fill ir, & actual ar-ounts you Wed for the
excendituicce and your interme. Campare tre inpulescendiLre, figures and
retons jircare) Ud vou make a profil of '9s3? Uv

—_—-———.

“5,

Activity 2 Educational tour.

Wicd any national morket near you and observe cll actelies and procedures

owh ch fae pltice there. !
“

=_

oe


--- Page 135 ---
—

summary

National markets buy crys and livestack TProgohouwl Zimbohwe, They ergure
Ina every chen gets access to food in the market.

Grain Marketing Boand, Cotteo Holdings Limited, Gairibord Airnbabwe Lirsted
and Tobacco Industry Marke‘ing Board are exarnples of nationel markets.
There ave several sources af int¢ome in an agricultural entercrise which
NCS selling by-products, hiring ous equipmentimachineary. vtilisime otter
skills G former bos and hosting classes or fansultancy seraces.

Fixedand direct costs are the bye Mac groups of expenses in a business,
Fixed costs ore expenses on enterprise has ond must poy whelher or rect il is,
Prac Sir.

Drect costs are costs which arse a3 a cesuit of ‘he Prooue for the cnrerore
dines,

cher expenses include firaricial aed personal costs.

Morey seen) on caricullurel npr § collec InNgut cosfexeorditure,

Tha money mode fram selling a crop is called -eturnsfinceme.

' Glossary
Depot - storage ploce for large quantities ef goads.
Enterprise - OGesness of project,
Fined costs - EADS ON etercise hos and must ooy whether
ar nobitys producing.
- Consulfganey - QING Sper advice ina certain field.
Direct costs cogs which cise a5 a result of the production the:
enlerise does.
Input cosifexpenditure - money spent iq aurchasing npub. :

_ - . —

bi¢ assessment

Multiple choice

Choose Ihe conmect aqnswer.

1.

Wir is the function ot nationa onarkets?

A. Poise livesiack.

B. Providing foreign cayency 40 farmers.
They buy agriculiural produets in the court,
0. Importing feos from ether counties.


--- Page 136 ---
7 Adepotis __.
4. 2) oloce for fixing cos Gnd buses
B, qstonane oloce for large quanrties of gaads
. q business or project
Doon exarngle of a material merket
1% OFLisamaketfor__ .

; AL Prictine B. nitlk Cc. vegetable Do whet
a Rorvested crops are classed Urcer ___

4, expenditure = B. imtts &, praait CG. outputs
| 5 Wher is Ihe term for maney spent an pursasing inputs?

4. Expendilure B. Gross protit

| ©. Capilal GO. Fixed cast

| Structured questions

| Answer oll the quesiions in full.

it List aay hwo pryate companies which market agriculture! products, [2]
| & Descritee the relationship pehysen income and expenditure, [2]
| 3. Give any one example of a fixed cost and another ofa cirecd os: 12]
| 4, Slate ary hwo examples of oancullural inputs. [2]
| 5. ¥roal san expendi? 11]

a


--- Page 137 ---
Unit 2? End of year assessment

— Foaper | —

Choose the conect onswer,
1, Whalis aariculkyret

A. Agriculture ss ihe productian of fiuits.

8. Aarcubre 6 lhe keeping of anineals for fod,

©. Aarculture is the growing of cereal crops,

B. Actcullure is the culFvation of sail te ¢raduce craps and roaring of cninrals. |
2. Which ot toe folowing is mato branch of agriculture?

A. Soil Screws B. Social studies
Co Ae heute Oo. Porestry ond wildlire
$000 — so branch nvelveo with lan machines. tools ana structures.
A, Agicultural ongineacne B. Animal production
Le. CID producinr: D. Agniculbural economics |
4. {roms grown forsale are sigwnos CIs,
Al mature: BK. cero ele hT f 0. vegetakle
5. IR nOhaowery of maintaining farm ters,
4. Shorpening B. Wolering C. Greasine OD, Orig |
6. A green tigngls on an corocncmical container mecns _
A, NO? otisorous B. extremely polsanaus |
; Co. onmrkiey pons toc I
4. Which level of toxicity is shown by a white tangle tn agrachemicals?
A. NOT pasanous B. Milxthy poisonous
c. There is no while triargle BD. Very dangerous

‘

I
®. Why is weolher forecasting mpontant to forrners?

ALT dillows fares to cheose the right workers.

A, | enables farmors to mcke time for holiday.

C. [hollows farmers lo choose the rigril foals and clothes,

, it helps ferniers plan their agricylyreal activities.
*, The following arc weealher element: except __

A. Coto B. faint ©. hurndity DO, choud cover
1D, The weeacher conditions of ao particular area over gq long Beriod of tine is

called.

4 weolher B. season ©. clirrate 0. région
1]. Which of the tollawng is associated with ¢ imate change?

4, [ncreosng tempera. B. Increated irmaction.

C. Agricultural activity, D, lipraved soil fertity.
12. How mony natural forming regions are in Zimbabwe?

A & BR. 5 Cc. 10 G1] !
ee


--- Page 138 ---
A. Region G Region 2 &. Regien 5 0. Regior 4
ld Which one oui of Ihe ‘egions receives the highest smoust of rainfall?
a, 7 B, fi, OE D. &
15. Wiry do facies at B grow drought resistan! cress like roullst crit sorq hu rey?
A, Because Pe region is very cold,
6 Because ihe region ecenvecs litle raintal -
C. Because it’s nal ollavwed 10 grow other creeps.
| 0 Because ihe temperatures in thal regen can be very high.
14, Bol corr position means
i &. Row dhe soil is arrayed

|
13. Name the region labeled C.

Bo wheat thee sais mada af

| a bow the soll feet O. where the soildornes fram
LF. Which soil component has tae lowest percentcge?
4. Organic matter Bh. Alr
C. Wabher DB. Inearganic matter

11S. What causes this yee of wealhering?

A] Plant action EB. Aninigs
C Tearipercure cunge RD. Wind
|! 19. Which of ihe faflowiog seis 3 dedlter can production?
|

& Sond BR, Loam ©. Cloy [. Salt

i


--- Page 139 ---
ON

"OC Seal het dices ol have the right rutients and cearinet s.ooort plant srowth is |

sGid im kee
A polluted B. poor Cl. unfertile 0D. ferhle
1. is. bad fect of sol orasian,
A. Siltation of sealer bocies B. Creation af fertile soil
Co. Mare transpiration DO More water in coms
22. Whitd of the folowing is nota cause ot soil pollution?
A. Green maonuring B. [edu lricl weoste
l C. Mairingy OG, Liltenng

ee rh.

| 24. A PICh sail moisture comservotion rreihacd is show in the oicdure?

A Porholirg B. Muching ©. Monuring D. Tied ridaing
|
i]
|
|

24. The picture show,

A, sciberover Boo munecht wea ter
C. sca pollution 0, wotey polluiian
p2o. Which fact Of plant has reapwodue live orgons?
; A. Leal B. Flayeer ©. Roots OG. Stern
jd, Is rniar olan? marca,
A Zirac: B. Potassium , Mitrogen D. Phoschoraus
27. What rane is given fo cn aed set side ‘og groves dnuits?
| A. Whodicd BE. Gorden Ct, Crerared DB. Field |

ne oo ese — —



--- Page 140 ---
—_

, a

r
a

we

4 combine hear
A Cobbuge

A owWeen a barnes

festeris used oa harves|

B. wheat &. famclecs G. grad uts
‘moore 6 less liar expenditure, "he farmer has noche 5

A wie B. solar =. profit Dy. lass
Whee is the bes” seaeu ba grow pecs?
4. Hot wotsecior Bb, Calc wel season

CG. Cald cry staan
Tenes mned 1S

A need] air

4 donot grow too well uncler crowded conditiens
c. need encugh air ta move arcund Iherm

0. enable ws -o phan atoer things around trees
Which cf the following slatoment: b hve?

4. Pests ana weeds da moat Ihreaten te health ot plonds.

B Fllecl of weeds include faking up nvinents and moisture meant far plants,
C. Pest darnage canner lead to yield lass aad drought.

3 Weeds do not slow down the growth rate of plants
The produc From a poultry form ore

AL med? and agg

GO. Hetay soasan
bea wer spaced becouse they _

eggs and leathers

5
TT feolkers and mvaqoiire GG. raarure and reat

Tre by-produ\ess of ia poultry farm ore
4. Meoland agi

Feather ard manure

JA Dalancen died 15

al

Eggs ond feathers
DB. Marure and meat

A. the supoly of the aporopriate food nutrients Id crrmels im Thier right |

pores Hear

B. making sure that arimo|ls dink water al the ight ‘ime
7 swovicing all ihe nutinents to animals
DB. presiding the arrrrals wilt ihe medication liey wed te lve hec thy

oWeich aucnent is required tor bone fornation?

4. Fats BR,  Coooohnydrates C_ Vitamins D. Minas

—  srevent and contral diseoces and aid Food digestion mn poultry.

A. Forts G Caraohydrates GC. Vitro OD, Minerals
What iso pcrasite?

A. fipar argoanism witheaut a place ta live.

B. Ana‘gatism which lwes incr ord Post.

C. it sahsst.

mn. Wiscananimel ‘hat 5 infected,

Wroere are external poracites found?

A Indhe bones of tae anil. B. lithe blood af ihe arinvel,

. Oe che skin ot she ane . 0D, lathe ntestines oi the aries.


--- Page 141 ---
49,

so

~~

The tree main esterrcl parasites of coultry are _ P
AL flods. 7apeworms ard retndywornns B. flecs. licé and tape warms
C, fleas eg mites and warns D, ifleas, lice and ley mites
. Whats dewarming?
4. Removing worns from an anima using your honed.
B. Gv'ng a drug to an arimal to get rid of werrrs.
©. 3preyving on animal to chase aecy veorrns.
G) Culing an animal wp fo remove weorrrs.
Whichis nota way of contrclling externa oerersites?
4. Splashing boiled waber in Ihe coinken house,
B. O<c-pping chickens in parctin.
OC. Removing and buming deep iitror.
D. Disin*ecting the chicker howse with poultry dip.
_A bird with parahsed legs and discharge al mucus from the reouth suffers
torr —_ - !
A. CPicken pox RB. For] pox C. Newcastle D, Coeccidiosis |
Wich one is nota type ofa beehied?
A. Bosket hive B. Bork bive ©. Clay po hive DB Window hve
- The following farm implements te Used por digging excepta_
AL Acurow B. space CL pick 0. hne
A. KAdpsack sproyer Bo MCwesr
©. Combine aarveste OD. Gisc plough

J Whech one is on example otan efficient and medern tractor’?
|
I

/ Which record shows how much money comes in and out of an agnfullura.
enterorise?
A. Bucloet a. Profit racard
C. inéome and expencdiiire GD. Cash flow

- A farmer buys poultry foods te leea chickens. Wrat kind of a cost is it?

A. Personnel 6. Wnnecessary 2, Fisec DO. Direc
A farmer saends $2 O00 in producing potatoes. ne gels a tctcl of $3 500 after
Salling the potatoes, Cokculate the prodid or lass made by the farrner,
A. Profit $1 500 B. doss $1 500 ©. Profit $5 500 ©, Loss $3 4500
he place where tobocce is sold by farmers is called the ;
A. Grain Moketing Baocarcd B. Corhord frrebabwe Lirnited
C. Tahaoce Auction Floor CO. Cotice Holdings Limiled


--- Page 142 ---
‘ Section A

Answer all the questions in this section. Each question canes 4 marks.
1 Waeie the branch of agnieuiiire that ceals with the following:

en sludly af sail feriicy
Bi farm machinery, tol sid) strive: lures
cio ptacduction of beet ard dairy carte
A) anurvals ame forest
e) managemed ol maney |
2 oa) Betne tne following teres:
pests I. weeds [2,
bl Give any are meted of controlling pes. [1]
Cc) Mate any ore wey of controling wcods. 1
| Hew are pests dangeravs to the healthy oF craps? 1]
3 a) What s lhe difference between o product anc a hy croduct? if]
b) Why is the solic back ct he wall of o Geep le: mouse Wweuaolly Buiit facing
tne airection of the prevadling wird? [2]
op Stede any beo faces 4 braoder should provide te chic. ||
4. 0) Define 2 palaneed che [1!
to] List ary two functions of carbohydrates irs care ier fre, [2:
c) Name the nainent which orocdes ‘he building blaces for body issue. [1]
a) What are ike venetits of vitaring tc cue reals? [1]
5a) Tee tallowing towers are found in which farming region
1 Bysngd
i. Boibnidge? [2]
b) Whatore the cimatic conditions of Ihe following @qgnicu tural regions
i. Regan !
i. Regions
ii, Regron 5? [3
4a) What is weatoerning? 12]
Is) Give Ihree aigerib of weiner mg. 13]
[39 marks]
Section &
Answer any two questions, Each question carries 10 marks.
“Fooa) i Woaotbis the best inne lo gia tar aloes? 1]
i Woe arry two: ways Cf lakirg care of formaiogs. 2]
i, Mame avy teu cests tie alec: tomalses. 2}
bb) i Give tea e2anipled of Ceocl Cups. 2|
i, YWoenis wheal best orewr r Zimbabwe? ‘ly
ii. Explain one netiod a havestng whet, iz]


--- Page 143 ---
-

U3 a) Whahes ororitccal beehive? ny)
i, Give any threc caam ples of artific! bee fives, [3]
nm. Wheat rneteial is used ta make a Laungstrath Ae? [1]
Blo Whetoare the two groups of parasites of polly? [2|
i, Give one exomple id each group in 8b 1. [ ]
ti. Whical ie Gewyorning? [1]

\* GC). Whats the difference between Contealling arid pareverting parasites?

[2]
| i, Shoate any two methods of preventing ntemeal parasites. [2]
: W. How cdr exterial codes O8 preveanisd? [1]
BG) oi. bistany three exornoles of farm machinery. [3]
; i. Which cre the hwo groups of farm machinery? [1]
Hi. Whats the we of a cLitvacoren borming? [1]
Nola) i Whatig a nctianal market? [1]
I. Crean Wo esoruples of rotioral markets in ZimGobwe. [2]

i. Wheat is the acvantage of a national narkel te ‘armers? [2] |

: 6} Define the fatlowingy:
 SxXpendityre i. Inari ['2|

Cc) Outline ary wea wos o former car earn @xlra ncerne:. [2] |
dq) Wriatere direct cass in an agnicullural project? [1]
(20 marks]

a 2

ee ee ee. -

a


--- Page 144 ---


