--- Page 1 ---


--- Page 2 ---
cree typ | OMe vere coccunyyer n geey ee Tene he ates
Urdt 1 Organs of the body [1] ceccuesneeeenavensoceneesntennseestnneEg eve rece cetwepe se titieesea ences :
Unit 2 Organs of the bady (2) ceccscasevennnscceceetiensntanarenanenceesazazamaeme setae eee
Eriel of doped: ASteSSITIe Mt ons ssssesessternete ere nenenrereetneen eam ane paguanenngane peyedee rns of tes

Syeet ] Sewete ome nedgith: 2 oe. oc ceacaerene copes ete ee toeebogotemen canenge cures :
Unit3 Healthy living habits Vp acecscteeccetteeee eset Tyacecquanendetenisectims peeeunened tgan gee ecteniceend 11
Unité = Healthy living habits it) eer vc ccccunngenceuumsseantetieyaenaneaeseiess
UvitsS Healthy living habits ic) ree os coccuuaenecnuueaccdteanyensumiea pedo neaacoceines «eeeneeees 22
Unit & — Hecealtry living Freakout [4p rere teen espernenertatec tte cotcupaeqectanieeeetotissaecatemese Z6
Pratt 2 Sabet VY eee ee ee eceenee ee ccraneteeramner ante ttone prtceeeent sq ececottnepece MLNS! vunecuestnnsicnts 31
Tt 2 ses 15 a 2 eee Fa suecteauayereetinece: * ugpeeectusaaeaeseniaecesot a
End of topic assessment pee inne cesar tmennvemmngeentienciseindacettingtemmeeterinacataanall]

Unk? water safety [1}----.--- peceeconscigecunnrnccesgun etic tgte goons ciamamsceegnenees tages gag 44
Unit 10 Wetter seateety (2) -sceseesereenseceenteerarectteneccec tt teemaemtamer® cpuvuneeetunraree! sovegyeesceenn 49
Wirt 11 Str S cesses ccseteceececnnsceccsenereneeetette  eeaneequueficughdunecagetavansecceveeecneesocimpensconaata 57 .
End of topic assessment cceutuasenryreananerquccensnrectemasarscenentretiedss cepetestinerenneneeesissseeneres nd

a ee Doe ee OE

Limit 13 Rusrirniricy {2} Leas ensnneecseee sen cecnenseenannne tame suantner scenes ees eT 72.
Unit 4 Bunning [I ce ccupryecendumepeaethinegicco#imeecsnenetennpagestuavenss peaneascncauasengectetinescotts 6
Unit 15 JUTTING. sees eteteteeeeetceet vcccctgneneesoteanes te duucecectuniaseccntemies nT?
Unit 14 9 Threwing ree inne csesinaseanineevteningecstteccntonyemeetusnircei seceaienies O44
End of topic assessment en ccctsntusayesenarerevsnsesanennignsnernengeesaneasnaoatseseannanpeceeter] 03

eethet, fe dial TRAMTES . ,
Foye ST SHOPS vette ee nnn deechavpeneneneeee staseesseet 1E5
Drill VF Spee ave CES esse cece creme ee teeta cette emtmmnr ee ee uavaneesetieegecainns 105 |
Urat 1900 Positioring cc cguurescauannssateaunececeenanetecetetannnesetoguaacessanmage sg MILEUE SS SE RUTIT? lo?
Unit 17 Res H OTT cccp_crnveev nt er ceantecetnencescnnercenannucensaneneectansicccttnraar | 1? ,. : :
End of topic CISSOSSITIOTTE cesses seeseenesteereresemsecctvtcercasamnarnenerasionmenmatenes| A -

‘ “1,
Hee ‘
1 4
i
' . 1
4
-
i
. I
. I
—_—— -_ — oe "


--- Page 3 ---
af -_

Unit 20 Grrr Cd POT aaa ececacee cece concen cones ne ee ceca cop eesensoucouenuenecutuensy sy 14

Uinit 2) SHC ec cerseis neers nena nacerccteteanecateccette eneesansnenueseseeseseecesensensacensasansae ies 120
End of fople assetinent i LL ee Le re ol I a4

tae .

Unit 22 Strokes... “oo cegeesccostcuscartecataueatiiesiievanatesicee estctecteseee eeeeeeeeveeee 16

Unit 23 Cri OM SHPIKING sc cccoccccccccscsccss cece cecsccsecsecessossessevesteestuseeseesessestessesuvtice 131 |

Unit 24 Qutcdener cactivitiens (1p ccc scassecsessesssenseasesavssesteastereessesecetece ae 13¢
Unit 25 Outdoor activities (2b oe. seesueevesseveeseegesutcnveyeeveateivtirinnavetaseiruies 145
Ein of feopiic cosseesgar nent |. act ce cen reeeeesenansesennesecansnensuetnansttanstodcteetedge creceee eee ESO

Mt 26 LOCOMOTION. ci init senntieateactaetccneceeeeseae Soc cecevaneereseseereeeeeeens 15%
Ered cf Resgpuie assert ssa cas ee stteceenceren se recrovesencesanausevensaneeasgeeueaeessunssncersaueaca. 1 Ge

* 7.

Unit 27 Background GING APP OITTIH PUSIC oa cece eee ee cee ee eeeee re cceeeeereeenene DOP

Urndt2& Potterns-and mowints..ccasce vt ke thc eee ted cece see clecesesceeeescepeeeuseupurnvitaneuenipares 14

+ noeuae

Unit 29 Movements and PY TAIT ce letcesetaetaeteseeseeenceseneanseransneceneeseesersessussteatansens LPF

Unit 30 Choreography veces plac uasuavectecsesenteeteeeeseesoseesensassnsasseventveseeneees 182
Unit 31 Formations... soecenscrceeeeceneaecercecneenns “se auemewseeeccersumvumea tes seasuaeaseasnateteatecscecescetee 185
End of tople assessment ooo. cea careers rerrerea carerea can saencasevensevencavenran POD

Erid cf Weer 1 SSOSSCrRG IE ttt cece este tests tes tees tenets tes tates tated co ttncn tote teteerseanesensenensad Po
Eried of Harr 2 CSSOSSITHOIIE cece cc cctee se ceh ees cctansesnnces ns eeses tenes ts teatatea cated steers ceeneeeeea cee 1D



--- Page 4 ---
cpojeabeat) Rapes
1, taentity body parts thal store and transport food
2. explain the process of storing and transporting faod.

The human bady needs food, Theemouth is an external organ which helps in the
rarsperting of food in the body,

atte eel (ee
digestif saiem digestion particle frreces
— * . = . - . = 8 . . . om . — soe

abs grape and store Toe.

The human body parts have several functions. Without fhe proper functioning of
any of the badly ongans, numans might not perro daily activities easily. There are
organs of the body that hanspert and sore food. These organs function in a system
eclled digestive system. 7

Ea en a co
1. Callect food Items such os, a benmen ana sugar.
+ How de the food iterns taste? .
% Discuss how we find out the taste of food. . ;

ior Bac gas Steers
The digestive system is a series of body organs joined together in a tract that

transports and stores Food.


--- Page 5 ---
Wrupso ob sprog ob dye mopman Coe thar persist aoe chore Food

Figure 1.) shows the organs that stére and transport food. The bedy parts that
transport ond sore food are Prré mouth, gullet, stomach, small intestine, large

intestine and the onus.

a. the mauth

The mouth is cn eternal Booty part used for eating

and drinking. Insidaithe mouth there are teeth and

the tongue. In the mavth the foods broken down

by the teeth. The longue helps to mix the food with

saliva 50 that it con move smoothly inks the gullet.
t at

b. Gullet

The guile? is a long tube found in the neck. ft
transports food from the mouth into the stomach.
The gullel cam expand and contract as food
moves thravah it. The movement of fhe walls of
he gullet through expansian and contraction
helps the food fo move down the gullet.

Food
rreanig
eer thee
quest, .

silomach

Activity 2: Movement af food down the gullet

You con demonstrate the movernent of the food
‘down the guilet Using a rubber tube! a mrarbte
“and a plastic container.



--- Page 6 ---
c. SHomach ‘ ; oc
The stomach i one of the largest organs which
stores food. it receives Foca fram the guilet. The
stammach Ralds food as the breaking down af
food takes clace. Food 3 oreken down fa smoller

particles. The breaking down of food into smaller ° Food in
particles is called digestion. sarah

i ae

d. Small intestine

The small intestina is the longest part of the organs
which transport and stare food. It is about é metres
lang. The smail intestine is joined to the stomach -
ond the large intestine. Digestion corlinves in fae
small intestine, The small particles from the stormnach
ore absorbed inte the blood and camied to oll parts
of the Godly.

e. Large intestine :

The large intestine measures about 1.5 metres long. ..
itis joined ta ihe small intestine. It abso water and
salts. It slores the waste colled foeces. The faeces
nre removed fram ihe bedy through thé qnus.

Make a model of the human digestive system using wire and clay or chy othet :
cavollable resource. ; met
‘Label the parts using pieces of Manilla BOpxer and string.

—_——-—

J

-——-. — eee
——————

:
. ,
. . ; : -
“ *

i
1. Draw ihe digestive systern and label the following parts: | !
\
|
!

a] Maui

bt Stomach

e} Small intestines

d| Anws ,

_ __ebrecks down feoadinthe mouth. 2,

The breaking down of food inte smaller particles colled
ane] —__ are absorbed in the large intestine.
Whoatis the function of the following parts:

at Gulet

b} Stamach? . ;
“4, Which oart of the digestive system removes feaces from the body?

tn ee fe he

1
. I
a

—a —e-. —_s —_— eS er —_
'


--- Page 7 ---
ith Body (2)

_ identify the body parts that store and transport alr
2 explain the process at stonng and transporting oir.

eee eee ee

We need air all the tine in order to survive.

-: <r = —— — i eee ee ee

Key words

Z breathing systeri’ ‘Breathing nestis veice box hached
bronchi air sqdts™ me .

lcons Tat tramspert arc stores af

All living things need oir for survival. Airis made Up of different gases, which include
carbor,dioxide ogd oxygen, The human budy needs oxygen from ar. We get
oxygen from the cinwhnen we breathg in, All ports of the beady will get oxygen when
itis transported t& them. Air enters the body thraugh the nose ond is ransported ta
the other parts of fhe breathing system. 4 series of Organs joined together to store
and tranécort dirs galled the breathing system. The nose is the extemal body part
which we Use for breathing. We can also breathe throwgh the mouth.

The cregthing (respifatary) .vsterm

aq. The note. |

The nose 6 used to fake oir in amd out,
it has fwo openings which are called
nosis. In the mostals theré ; are, Ficairs. and
mucus whieh help remove dirt- oa wall as
fo manten the air we breathe In.

Bb. The threat

The space from fhe nase to the back of
the inside of the mouth is the throat, The
throat is abavt lacm lang. If is yoined to
Ihe yolce Box, The volte box produces
the voice using the vocal cards,

TAypt SPER era



--- Page 8 ---
~~.

. - Wolos box
wired EelpHe

c. The windplpe - 4
"The gir from the nose posses through the throct and Right lung |
voice box inte the windpipe. The other name of the -
windpipe is trachea, The windpipe iso tube abot’.
}2em in length, it looks like a vacuum Cleaner hose.
The windpipe forms two small Woes which attach ta
the fight and left lungs.

The windpipe has the same structure as @ V@CUUN,
cleaner hase. ,

in your groups, examine the yoovum cleaner hose
at your school or home. Describe its structure. *

d, Lungs , i
The breathing system is made up of fo lungs which are found on the nght and

left sides af the body. The tre lungs are joined to ihe two tubes called bronchi. -

Bronchi the piural form, while one, lupe is called a Bronc hus. The lungs have a Pink
colour and are made up ol email airsacs. Air sacs are very small air bags! found
in the tungs which store air, The dir sacs are surrounded, by blood vessels which

comy blaod.

The aie moves from the windpipe into the Bromchi, It enters the cir sacs and moves
mtg ihe Hood through blood vessels where if 5 carted To all parts of the becly.

La

Air sacs in the lungs

The body uses thet oxygen caried by the
blood. When oxygen Is used up by the body co, ‘

parts, carbon dioxide is formed. The fady does | _—. ae weasels
not need carbon dioxide. Blood vessel caller el, rom
capillanes camry carbon dioxide to the lungs a are
for the body teraxhale it. The egrbon dioxide in AWveall
rhe lunas moves fram the smmiail air sacs to the
windpipe and out through the nose.

Bia 2a Carga, POP IPs
pete P

The dir sacs in the lungs are similar to the air
bubbles on plastic bubble wrappers, a rs

Peaernes 7 AA peter © Spa velgdp pect”



--- Page 9 ---
a

i Collect plastic bubble wrappers that have air buibles. Feel the air bubbles and |
ity to press them hard. Exoloin what you feel and what hap pens.

@. plaphragin
The diaphragm is’ muscle found bélow the lungs that separates the stornach °
and chest. It can move up and down os we breathe,

Breathing

Breathing is the movemertt of ai in and out of the body. During breathing, the
lungs. digphragm and ribs change their gesilion in order for >t people fe breathe,

Brecthlreg In

During predlhing in, the ribs push ovt and
increase the space occupied by lungs At
the sarne time. the diaphragm contracts
and flattens. This allows the movement

at oxygen ich air inte the Manes.
my t

2 moeygen Fich ait rice en

> lings, ibs pte oul

diaphragm moves down

My Fa r 7 Sepia - _. =a
; que 24 attr of breather cegqans 2s.
Breathing out . br eethicn, a

air rich in carbon dickide moves out 7

When we breathe but, the iis move-in
ond reduce the space occupied by the.
lungs. At the same time the diaphragm
redoxes ond the iris pushed out of fhe
lungs. This pushes the cxrin the lungs out
through the windpipe and-rose.

hungs and ribs rove in

diaphragm moves up

” Figure 2.7 position of breething o-gans when
Rreaihing oul

tn
=
E

si. Puta ¥ tube into, ine. opening of 9 rubber

; stopper.

[2. Fe -hwo balloons of thé same size to the two

: ams of the ¥ tube using string or rubber bands.

-3. Push the rutter stopper Inte the plastic

fo Owyhee.

he Cut @ thin circleceé plastic sheet which con fit - i

‘, over ihe bottorn ‘of the coniginer, _. 4
a : a,

*
: 4
t . '



--- Page 10 ---
Using sting, tie the plostic ‘naslover ine botiom of the plastic conteiner,
It must net be too tight,
Pull down lightly on the plastic sheet wsing fingers.

_ Push up lightly on the plastic sheet Using hragers.
Explain what hoppens when the plastic. sheet 6 pulled down and when itis |

OD MH

“
=

1. ‘Which breathing system part is represented by each af the following on Fhe
Rreathing model
ga) Plastic container
ih Balloons —_ _.
el Top of Y-Tue
qa] Branches of ¥ tube
e| Thin plastic sheet —_ ——.

The movernent of air inte and out of the body is called —___

a

a Draw the breathing systern and lobed the following Parts:
a} Nese
bh) Windpine
ec} Lungs te .

dj) Biaphragm oo
4. Whatis the cther name for the windpipe?

e Aseries of organ of the body thet transport and store food form the digestive
SySteen. hj
+ Same of the organs of the digestive system ore the mouth, guilet. stemoch,
small intestine. targe intestine and the anus. ; - i
+ Digested tood eieorsad into the body and camed by: blood to all parts. | - ,
» Foeces which are waste maleral ore removed from the body through the
Oru. , °
» The brecthing system ts a syatern that stores anc trearscHts air fo different body
carts. . . -
» Some of the organs oF the breathing system are: nose. windpipe. lungs and
the diaphragm, 4
Breathing is the movement ef oir in and out of the body.
* During breathing. the lings. ibs and diaohragm meve in and cnt.

— _ —— —— -- .- - ee
. ac

wae ok

breathing system - the system whichis made yo of the organs which anspor ; |
cir into and out of the Body... _

breathing _— the movement of air into and autof the body

eee

C7 ) | | 4

Co '


--- Page 11 ---
at

rs

digestion , - breakdown of food

digestive system = -) Me organs of the body which breakdown food

saliva — the watery substance found in thé mouth

gullet i > the food pips which cones food from the mouth to the
. ; ‘stomach

shoring . - keeping

absorb © os fake ir

Choose the carect answer.
Use thea picture below fo drnewer questions 1-4.

Write down the letters rapreiénted by the following ergans:

l, Stomach ~
2. Large intestines
3. Mouth
4, AMUS
3, breaks down food in the mouth,
4. Teeth . B. Tongue 7 4. Threat D. Lips
4. is mixed with food in he mouth so that itcan mave smocihly
A. Air . B. Oxgen C. Solive BD. Faeeces
7. The breaking down of food inte smaller particles ls called .
A, treathing B, eating c. drinking 0. digestion
8. Which bedy port stones more foad?
4, Guillet. Ce B. Stermmach
Cc. Mouth 0, Small intestine
9. The large intestine absorbs
AL saliva SB BIR C. dir D. Foort

‘

Ld
te 1 .



--- Page 12 ---
10, Which part of the digestive system rermioves faeces fram the body?

A, Liver &, Stomach Cc. APS D. Mouth

Use ihe picture oat the model of the breathing system below to answer questions
11-14, .

Which part of the model represents the:

1], Fibs
12. Lungs
12, Wind pipe
14. Diaphragm a
1S. What is the name of the muscle that is found below the lungs?

A. Ribs B. Airsac 7 €. Biaphragm D. wind pipe
14. The stare air in the hig. . . .

A. bronchus B. windpipe C, ries D. air soc
17, Wha is the othigr name for the windpipe? oo

4 Threat B, Mouth CG. Trachea Bb. Voice box
1§. ___is thet movement! of air in and oul éf the bady Thraugh the nose,

&. Drinking B. Breathing ©. Digestion CD. Eating
19. The name of the gas in the ait ve need is —_._

AL GHYGEM 4! » BA woter vapour

C. steam BD. carhan dioxide
20. Tne hairs int thie nose nelp to —_.____ air.

Answer the following questions.

Ot BG bo =

4. clean 7 BR push c. Buel D. stap

| The digastive system is made up of and body parts. [2]
. The windpipe is part af the _______ sysleIm". , , [1]
the __.._~ helps fo mix food with saliva in the mouth, [1]
Food is broken ta smater pieces in the —. fe}
The function of the large intestine is to absorb and ‘[2]
The ian extemal organ whieh we Use for breathing. [1]

- -

:


--- Page 13 ---
a

7, Draw ‘the b breathing systern and jabel th the following parts:

oc) Nose
b) Windpipe .
e} LurKys
qd) Diaphragr , [5]
#. The voice box produces the vaice Using — —______. [1] 7

Practical asse ssment

-], Design a Breathing system model and demonstrate breathing In and
breathing aut.
2. Design the digestive model using clay, or wire or papier mache. Label Sports |
of the system using manila, ,

* -
4
F
al
- "4,
:
_t -
Dl
.
13
| :
. H
. 7
;


--- Page 14 ---
’ .

Healthy living habits (*j is

1. identity the ehysical activities done at horhe and school .
2. classify the physical activities done at home and school. mo :

i —

—_——

‘Eating a balanced diet and exercising ore inportant activitias for a healthy |
jitestylé. + om co, |

—— — oS eo —_———s

——s

4 1 .
I

Key words ) |

ohysical activity sk fitness pounding coordination
*% balonde agility oo ;

Physical activity is ony activity that gets your body moving, makes you breathe
quicker and your hear beats faster. It dis mecdne movement of the Body trat
uses energy, EXamypies of physical activities are walking. dancing. gardening and
playing games. These activities must be done actively. Physical actety nromoies
growth, stronger DONS. muscles and joints, ci stronger Kear and anealthy “eight
and mund. oo ro

Te maintain health and reduce risk fo health problems you must hove af leash one
hour of pinysical activity every day. Risk means danger. There cre yoTiouUs prysica
octivities that can be done at home, school and in the community in order To

improve Our heath.

—=-_ — ee"

-

Physical activifies at home | a

Alot of physical activities can be done every day at home ta keep the body
phiysicalby fit. The following physical activities can be done at home:



--- Page 15 ---
a

Tt. Cleaning the house

Cleaning the house ita physical
activity which can improve
health and Mmess. Faness is
when You are able ta camy out
tasks without excessive Fatigue.
We must help Gur peoreints to
clean inside and outside the
house: It is -imporkant toa usa
shrength whist cleaning as this
will help te improve fitness.
Working slowly will not ingore
your health ane fitness,

2. Digging inthe garden ae
Digging tn the garden at hore -
8 O very good example of a
physical activity which can
help reduce your weight anc
Mmprove your ftneass, When you
dig, you breathe dhaster and
your heart will begat foster, This
physical activity makes your
body sweat, Sweating removes
waste fram the body.

3. Washing the cor

Anather actyity which con
moke family membern work
tagether is washing a car. The

family mambers oan désist.
@ach other by fetching wotey, -

while other members wash
the cor. This physical activity
helps the whole famiky keen At.
The Brushing, scmibbing and
wiping dione in this activity
dows active movement of the
different body parts.

kg



--- Page 16 ---
4. Pounding grain using pestle and mortar
Pounding activity is Gone Wsing
a pestla and a mortar. Pounding
is hitting hard on something with
an object. The activily can help
impreva the strength of the muscles
ot the body. It can Improve the
function of the heart by making it
Beat faster, Ho improves balance
gna comdlinaticn.

Adlance is distribution of weight that
keeps & person upright oF stead.
Coordination is the ability fo use
different bedy ports at fhe some ;
tire. When pounding in pairs a Tigwe 3.4 Children making samp by sounding q:cin
groups, take tuts and avaid injunes.

(1. Bring a peste ond moartat te echoal: Practise pounding using a mortar and -
- k r a |

eres the, + an ae
(2, identify the body paris anckrackeses thot are used wen pounding. :

Sa De eee ee —

Lt

5, Playing ganres Lo ,
This physical actwity ¢ called hat potalo -

game. If is. a good game for health and
fiiness which can be done by fornily
mainbers at home. The game is played
using hands only, To play the game you
need a small ball ora rolled up stocking.
Tost the ball to a memiber of the family
whet will catch and toss fhe Rall to
another member, Continue to ross to
reach dther until ane mercer misses fo
catch. The member wha fois to catch
is out of the game, Tha game continues

Py
—— ——-

——<— — ee —_ ce
7 +

“a |
Tae

1

1

Flay Ihe potate game with your fartky members ot home, . i
Flay other games that you know ct home. an }

—_.- ———_

,
: -

- oe a —— oo"



--- Page 17 ---
t-
Physica! activities at school
At school there, are a vorety of physical activities that con helo improve our
health and fitness. Besides reading. and writing at school, we must also take part

In physical acilvittes which can improve our fitness and health. The following are
some of the physical activities which | can be done at schoal:

1. Watering the garden

Working in the schoo
parden i g good
Physical activity which
makes intemal argans -
such as fhe heart and
lungs stronger, This ©
can improve the wey
the intemal organs
function and also lead
to a headithy life. Other
activities that can be
done i the schpel
garden ta improve
fitness are digging and
weeding.

. Figure 3.a Lear Juting on 4Agricultyre legson ot schoo!
¥ .

2... Musica! hula hoop game

Musica! hula . hoon game
is O fun Mishig game, hat
allows the bady to move and
balance in diferent wer. it
helps the body ta be fit ane.
Improves agility, coordination =
ond Boloance. -
' Te de this activity, you need |.
a hula hoop ane music, The
game can be choereagraphed,
Going afferent forriatiaons and
Balances. Tou can de vwaroys
activities such as hopping,
jumping and rnin gy wabrdst Figure 2.7 Leorners dudng a Frysicet Educetian lesser
blaying with the hula hoa, 2

: 1 *
l

. . 1
1 . .
: .
.


--- Page 18 ---
4. Skipping rope game

Skipping rape games are
good physical octivities which
can be done with fiends cf
sched! during break fine.
$kioping 6 a tll body exercise
which uses legs. shoulders and
eirms for turing the rope Os
well as for skipping. Skipping
halps to reduce body weight.
ft ean aise improve balance,
coordination «and agillty.
Agility is to be quick and
graceful wren performing
skill. Skipping con be done
indwidually, in pairs or in groups.

4. Hopscoich game {pada)

Tre hopscetch game is 4 fin,
game which can be played -
outdeers ar indoors. The game
canbe ployed using jo ned hula
hooos oF draws hopscotch a5
shown |f Figure ay The heaps
can be joined wild strings. |
«qn help to built your strength
and balance: as well a5 your
hecith and fitness..10 play the
game, use a srgall flat stone.
which you thraw into a hoot,
Hop an ane leg through the
other hoops,

Fh

Choose a closs leader,

State 3 physical activities thot are not covered in this book, |

Divide the class into $ growps. Each group is assigned one of fhe 3 physical |
f
I

1.
z.
a

activities. trae
4. Each group role plays demonstrating the given ohysical acitivity.


--- Page 19 ---
1. Any actity that makes your body move. breathe quicker and makes your
head beat faster iscallade.

‘2. Name three physical activities which promote fitness.

. Physical activities improve the function of and in the body,

4. Cleaning the house is a physical activity that can help improve your__
and.

fe fal A

4, Whatis the nange of the physical activity shown in the picture above?
6. Which three coPiponents of fitness are improved by ‘the musical hula hoop’

_ game? . “* .
7, Name two skills ised in the game “hopscotch ring’.

"oy

ae


--- Page 20 ---
Unit 4 ‘Healthy living habyits(2}

1. classify the physical activities done at horne, school and the Community
2 keep a record of the physical activities done at home, school and the °
cammunily. on , :

-_—_——— — -+

_———_

Physical activilies are important to keep our body healthy and fil. State two _
physical activities done at home. Lo,

eee ee ee oS

ney words
cemmunity campaign diary. infections . dbeae
diabetes obesity !

Physical achvities can improve our health and reduce the risk of developing
several diseases such as abesBy.“labetes ond hear disease. Obesdhy 6 a disease
thai is caused by overeating. Diebetes is a dkecse that affects how your body

Wses blood sugar.

Physical activities inthe community.
The people Irs the’ semmunity must take part in many physical activities ln order to
improve thei héulth and fitness. A community is a. group of people wha five in fhe
earn ared, A healthy cornmunity is a happy conamunity. Physical activities can
help reduce the ryk of illnesses in the community. Pamilies-must work, together in
the communities, fo promote healthier lifestyles. Some of the actvities which can
be done in the communities are: o tos

Doing ¢ clean-vp campaign

fen die goecioating 14 clon vo omer

o

re eee

4 —. 7


--- Page 21 ---
v

-

4 campaign is when pecple work together actively to achieve a certain gad. '
All the people in the community must take part in cleaning activities. It is an
Important ohysical activiby which con promote our health and fitness, and prevent
the outbreak of diseases. As the people pick litter, sweep and clean the drains.
fhey will be exercising, These activities keep the Gedy active and improve the
functioning.of bacty parts such as the heat, During the cleaning activity. we must
BUD On protective wear Tht helps reduce the spreading of Infectous diseases.
Infectioys diseases are illnesses caysed by the entrance of gérms in the body. We
need fo weor foce mosks. quimboots and gloves to protect our bodies from germs.

The ambabwean govenrnent launched clean-up campaigns a8 @ health and
physical activity programma. The fist Fiday of every month wos declared a
Natenal Clean-up Ceoy,

Organke 4 clean-up club ct schogrcipd Comat a clean-up in Oreos mec your
ischodl like the shopping centre, clint! ragds and bys terminus.

Cycling.
aa nS |
Cycling i. a phigical activity .
which con be done by
members of the community, The
comrounity cen fom a cycling
club which promotes cydoling
as an activity for keeping: ‘fit,
Members of the club con cycle ”
three times & week. Cycling
improves the stength of the leg
muscles as well a5 the woy our
lungs ond heat work. During
eychng, the cyclist must Wer
protective clothes such: as
helmek gloves and shoes, When
cycling along the road you need .
ic fallow the road mules fo avold Figure da People Ing cycling club
docidents.

Kovate club

_ . oa

Karate is oné of the physical activities which con improve health and fitness, t can .
promote good behaviour and provide skils far sali-cefence, It is important to he Vo
able to defend yourself when attacked by anyone in the community, 4 karate .

wk . =
ay . . .
- . : . .


--- Page 22 ---
re $3 Pecala pectorming xarcte

club promotes fiendship a3 members or
karate teacher must tedch karate skills
your karate teacher's instructions. Menmbers of
to go around fighting ather people in the cammun

Aerobic dancing

Dancing ta music isa physical
octivity which can be done by
menibers of the community
in oa ocernmunity hall or
syrm@sium. Aermbbic dancing
is © type of .dance which
can improve how civ lungs
and heart function. - This also
improves finess." Dancing iri
groupsis fun and helps to tuild
fhendship among members of
the cormunity.

Form an aerobic dancing club.

ihm

Discuss the importance of dancing
Practice clifferent dancing exercises.

figure 4.4 People dargirig dulng on aerobics class

<2 °°» ° » -
1 .

a » tt

e likely fo meet new people. Only a trained
to avgid injuries. Do not deo karate without
the karate club are not alowed
ity. They should be disciplined.

exerchas to the bocty.

=F



--- Page 23 ---
Pas Dafoe of physica act vities

Physical activihy can be done at home, schoof and in the community. Table 4. j
shows vonous physical activities done at home, school and in the corununily.

“oaesie ota OF ptysica: ecre ie:

; [ribarrtke}
2. raring 2. Cycling
2. Tree ptantin
3, Gardening _ o Sport Prannn's
, - 3. Clean up campaigns
4. Playing games 4. Exercising
4. Spor festivals
§. Dancing . 5. Games * P
- - 3. Community dances
4. Jogeing .. .
; 4. Sorts clubs
7, Stretching | RO
. he 7. Fixing roads and filling
Up guillies
Ha

Se gayrical actyity diary
Keeping o physicat ochvity diary is a way to keep record of how active you are,
You can record all your physical aetivities in a diary, A diary is a baok where you *
recerd all the activities you do evar day, It can help you to keep record of your
daily physical achvittes for example, the minutes you spend mnning or the days
You @xercisea every week, ihe following is an exomple of a physical activity diary
and how to recerd inférmation in the diary.

“A ysioshac’ oc Sloan

i

PayScale ity PRyticol Physical Frysitual Paysecaol
Activity Achy lbp * cliviby Acslaiby

Home

Phytiesl
Ae Exile

Pliireal| gry Dutghoan Cuiroticre Burshern Teuration Durobonm Duratan


--- Page 24 ---
The physical achvity diary shows The days of the week, tyae of physical activity.
euration (rime taken ta de the actrity| and the date the activity wos done, Recora
all tre information in the diary using the headings ‘n the table above. if tre ohysical
activiies are net recorded, itis dificult to check your progress in physical acuity.
The ciary aieo helps you 44 increase the time spent on some physical orctivities.
for example, running ane kilornets in the fist week: you can increase that to two
kilometres, This infarnation must be recorded in fhe disr,

—=—-+ ——- ee sete eee ——

Design your own physical activity diary for o week using the headings in the
sample of tha physical activity olan. Write dawn all the information for your own
activities over G pariod af one week. °

_ =: one = om

What és Ihe importance of physical activities?
Mame 2 physica: activites that can be dane by the camirnunity.
Infectious cicases are caused by_—_ .* ;
Cycling inrproves the: —__ of the legs.
In Ziratebwe. the first Friday of every mantn was declared the __.. —.
One uc which con be formed in the coramunity 5 fhe — —oILk,
State the importance of karate a5 a physicgk achvity.
A __igqa book where yourecord al oo. 2 yg pee eae wor
the pmyvsinal actvitiel done every day. ee cg
8 The activity in the piciure helps improve the “note
functian of _—— and Be:
10. Give the reasons why the phryical actyity
Can ls Im portant.
11.Geggn your own shysical activity flan tor
Aweek.

l
¥
=

OM Win b WON



--- Page 25 ---
a

7,

EB!) ate ‘oe a '
ee he wae

1. identity diseases that con be cavsed by Imbalances irr ovtritsoncal value
2 explain deficiency cise ties.

Nuifent are needed by ihe body far heal. State 5 food nuients needed by
he body for hectth, ,

deficiency disaases Underweig hit bow legs nutrition
boone

eee cee — 3a

Healthy living makes Us feel good ard keeps Us from diseases and ather healte
problems. One way of héallhy living is te eat food with enough nuttition. Nulntios
is the process of abserbing nutrients ‘ram food to use in the body. Poor Pte:
can be caused by not eating enough or failing to choose the right xinds of foed.
Failing te eat a balanced diet iIncredses the rsk of developing diseases hecatse
of nutritional value imbalances, ;

wl TAR Eas)

These are diseases caused by the imbalance in nutritional value or lack al nurents
such as proteins. vitamins and minerals. 30me of the diseases are scurvy, nickets,
aoltre, marasmus and kweasniorker, dhese Giseases ore oko called deficiency
diseases. ,

Scuny

aange juice lemon

wah Fars fyb ae le ot


--- Page 26 ---
Seurey is a disease caused by lack ef vitamin © in tne body, Cecoying of gurrs.
swollen. bleeding gums and slow healing wou nds are some of the sians of suffering
From scurvy. Most of the fruits like oranges. lemons and strewherry contain vitamin
Cowhich aevents scurvy.

Rickets

Piekets are caused by lack of vitamin DB. Ricketts are weck and soft anes whicr
con bend as tne child grows, 11 causes muscle weakness and bowlegs. Bowlegs
ore tags thot pend around he knees due to rickets. Fish, dairy products and fver
ore some of the ric sQurCeS of vitamin D needed to prevent rickets.

Gatre

ay! i

Geitre ip dseqase caused by lack of a mineral cabled iodine in jhe body. Goitre is
the swelling of part of the neck. tt causes Poot growth in chicren. lodised salt and
salt weter fish are some of the ich sourees of indine which must be eaten to avec
qaitre. Most of the lnad we eat every doy centains iodiseact salt.

er at

Collect pictures af food that can prevent the following deflciency diseases:
f. Scurvy 9 Golte * +5. |

sd



--- Page 27 ---
Pd

Kwashiorker og

Beane: Mio pRa nd WHO ITT:S.

Pane tiaes ew cam tign ts Pama ee

Rweshigrkor 6 a disease coused by lack of protein in the bady, It is one of the
deficercy dsecsesin children from aqeds arfected by poor food supply. Children
with kwashicnzor ave swollen belies, feet and ankles. Balanced diers rich
in oreteins such as 2ogs. milk, beans; kapenta, meat and mopeani worms help
prevent this problem, ,

AMarasmus

meat and eggs

sorgcticiatdenga, bo or af the ; -.

May

Maraemus 8 o disease caused by lack of nutients such as corbohydrates, and
proteins. It occur in children. Children vith marctrnus lose a lot of muscle and fot
and they are underweight. To be undervéight 8 to have 4 lower beady weight far
yourage. Dry skin and har ore signs of marasmus, IF leads to poor growth. Maras us
con be reduced by eoting feed with proteins, carbohydrates and aiher renerals.

eee —_— --

Collect pictures of food thaf con prevent the following defictency diseases:
1. Kweoshtorkor

2. Mrs

Create an educational poster for an cwareness campaign.

®


--- Page 28 ---
mone lho |.

F
a
cd
1

6A child with bowlegs 15 suffering frern — —- --

All diseases caused by lock of nutients are called _.
Gwe two examples of deficiency ciseasss.

A disease caused by lack of vitamins < is celled —.—-
Rickets are caused by lack of _— .

Kame any food which can helo to preven’ scurvy.
One source of iodine 1% ——_..

Wwrat isthe name af the disease the child n the
Whai are the 2 signs of a child cuftening fern marasmus?
How can we prevent kwasghiarkort

: fa
¥' 1
it .
1

dbeoses.

picture is suffering fron?

A be



--- Page 29 ---
1. identify disécses that canbe caused hy lack oF execcises
2 Ioentify dseases That can be caused by poor sonitary caoncditians,
ey AR
ir ae
Lacs of sore nubiants in the cody can cause food deficiency diseases, Shote
any (hree deficiency deeaies.

wee

on

high blaod pressure > sanitation fever contaminated weiter
dehydration stagnant . bacheria

. a"

A lace df exercise “causes mony health problems such as opesity, high Blaad
pressune, dicbetes and heart diseases. Many people die because of the eects of
lock cf esercee. Exercising § good for healthy festa.

Obesiby .

Obesihy os wher a person bas toa muecd body fal. it is a health danger which
incregses the isk af heat aiseases, high blood pressure. diabetes and cancer,
Obesity one of fie major problems of ack of exercise, Increasing physical activity
ond eating foods vith less fat, and drinks wilh less suger can prevent unkealthy
Increase in weight.



--- Page 30 ---
~
Diabetes

Sigbetes i¢ a disease in which the body is Hob akee ke control the sugar levels in. she
oloced. Lack of exercise and increase in body weight causes diabetes. Diabetes
eenises heart and kidney diseases. Exercising, reduces body weight WRICh can
helo prevent diabetes.

7 I

White bread Whiba nce Fiezy drinks Cake hoe craarn

Avoid eating ao much of proc essed foods like while bread cand sweetenad taods
ike cokes ang fizzy dings, these foods contain “oo Much sugar.

Heart diseases
Lack cf prysical activity Causes heart diseases such @s heart attack. We should

reduce earing laod with a lor of fat and salt. Eating fruits ancl vegetables as well
5 exercising hes ta cartel heart sisGases.

Physical ackvity 6 a healthy ‘ving habit thal mus! be practised by everyone Ic
nromole body fitness,

Discuss the physical activities which help keep the body fit and reduce Ihe risk.
of preventable diseases like obesity, Use a bathroom sca ta meqsure your
body weight, Record your weight in your diary avery month.



--- Page 31 ---
a

High blood pressure is when the force: of the blood pushing against the walle of thie
blood wessels is too high, When the fo-ce of blood reaches high levels. if can Caure
Serious health problems. Lack of excrcise can cause increase in blood pressure,
High blood pressure increases the risk of heart and kidney diseases. tis Qood ta
exercise in ander to canthol your blood [wessure.

Grew water from a plastic container using
hospital syinge vntil itis Full.

Always wear Jotex gloves when handling
hospital syringes.

Close the tip of the syinge sing sheky stuff
ororolled piece of paper, Push the tly nge!
of the Syringe inside,

Explain whal happens to the sticky stuff.

Water is forced out of the syfinge hen you push the plunger. The force of water
pushes the sticky stuff from the tip of the syinge. The movement of water as it
cushes ihe sticky stuff is the same as the blood os it pushes against the walt of the
blood vessels. The pushing force is called pressure. High blood pressure mecns thet
Ihe pushing force.of blood in the blond vessels is very high.

In order to contal your blood pressure. eat enough fruits and vegetables. The
follwing must be avended?

Eating too much salt
Drinking alcahel
brace be PR ST le
Ovenveaight

~

Some diseases ore caused by poor sanitary conditians, Sanitation is the practice of
orctecting health through hygiene. Gacd sanitary conditions invalve clean water,
toilets or latrines te mancae waste cnd food preparation. Some of the diséases
caused by poo santarn conditions ave cholera. dysentery, tyehod and bilharia,


--- Page 32 ---
We
Cholera

Crolers is an infectious disease caused by eating food or Grinkirug water
contaminated with bacteria. See Figure 4.3 ch. Bacteria is a gern that cases
fsease. It can lead to dehydration and Sven death iF not ireated, Dehydration
iswhen tre body loges a lot of veater than the amount trat is taker in. It coOusES
walery diarrhoea, The diamhoed 6 like rice: wot Sr in cour.

Ta preven cha'era we must dink woter jrom orotected sources like borehole or
weter tanks. See Figure 4.5 b). Borehole water she ld be testedand decontaminated
before use, We must albvays clean cll the inuits pofore we ect them. Cooked food
must be covered to aveid contact sith house lies. Alwerys wosh yout hands using
renning clean water Gnd soap or oshes after csng ire toilet.

Dysentery

Dysenteary is an infettigus disecse Cou sed by
bocieia which enters the intestine through
food or wate, Dysentery Causes S@vere
diarhoea which can contain stood, mcs 3
or pus, Fooas like fruits must be cleaned. We 4%
must wash our hands betors eating. 7

Tyehoid

Typhoid 5 an infeclious disease coused by
hocteria. It can oe passed through drinking
contaminated water and eating dirty food.
Contaminated water’ water thot has Geen
‘hol couse diseases, It can cayse high fever,
diaThoea and vamihng. A Peeen with
typhoid [sen weck. eair in the starnach
and fe odocres.

We can ‘educe the chance of spreading ; ies
Ihe dsecse by using boiled water for drinking ere
and washing tod. ot



--- Page 33 ---
rd

heme. ar: vaer h

= oe

Tyohoid, chdlerg and dysentery are diseases thot couse diarrhoea. Dianicen
léads ta loss of fluids in the body. This causes dehydration which may lead to loss

of life. Tae salt and sugar salution is Ine best way to replace the lest fluids in the

body, The salt and suger solution is also known as the oral rehydration solution.

Bilbarzla

Bilhagic is a dsease caused by wornns
found in stagnant woter in reer or
a dom. Stagnant water as water thet
does not flew, for example. water in a
pond, The worms can enter the bac y
whe Oo OeSOr 1 SIMming, washing oF
playing in dirty woter, People can olko
become infected by dninking “oter or
ecting food that has been washed ni
unteoted water, Bilharia affects the
ijestines and the bladder which stores
urine. The cisease also affects the Brain
and the wags. 4 person cifectad can
past ould in the urine and faeces.
We must gaim, and bath in clean
woter Cink clean water and aka wis
clean water to wash fod. , vot

Discuss the importance cf good sanitary conditions to the people in the
community.

1. Name 3 diseases coused by lack i? exercise,
is disease in which the body is not able to control the sugar in the

bt

bcd.

We contral heart disease thraygh ._
Whatis high blood pressure?
How can we contral high blaod pressure?

Slote two habits which must be cv oided ta central high blaod pressure,
Write down three disecnses cousec by poor sanitary conditions.

What causes cholera?

Tre type of diarhoed wath blood i called

10. What is the name of the gers the! cause choclera and dysentery?
1. s caused by worms forne in stagnant water in dans and Avers,

cine _

20 foe th & os


--- Page 34 ---
1. identify safety rules and regulotions for various achvities
9. srate injuries relaled to physical activites.

-kgs
ay”

Lack of exercise leads to diseases like high blood pressure, abesty ard heort
deecdes.

bouts regulations abuivedangeage jeveellery littering
“ extinguished hikine
Ir all physical activities we do at nome. schol and the cammunity, safely miles
and reguiations must be followed, Following sohelty rules and regulations helps
in the prevention of injuries or even loss of lives. Regulations are tyoes of ‘ules
used to contral the way phydical activities are dene. There ore different ruies and
regulations Used in athletics. qymnestics. carting and awimiming.

« r

Bressing

In the: gymnasium;
* No jewellery of any type such Js rings and necklaces shoyld be worn

G


--- Page 35 ---
Shoe: are not allawed on che gy floor. Bare feet ar gymnastic shoes cre

recommended
Stockings are not safe becouse Ihey are slippery on mats or hard flower :
Gir's must weer leotards only

Boys must wear tshirts tucked into shorts that are nol bagay
Ho celts, buckles and zippers ae Ollowed

Preparing for gymnastics

Arive early for the class

Ne food or drink smeuld Se fake ba the gymnasium

Wisit The toilet bofare the lassen

wo orhlete siculd leave the gym vithout permigson from fhe teacher

During the gymnastics lesson

+

Stan by worrring Up properdy

Recor any problems such os injofies or sickness fo your teacher

Do not do any activity in the gyrgrcpiur without the teacher's permissier: ond
Inéraction

Ao running around

Know the skills you ore Parhorrund. 7 not attenipt skills You are nat able to da

Code of conduct

Always follow rues and reguictioans

Maintain high standards of good behavigur

4éveid use of abusive language, Ab sive lang age is any language that makes
ceaple feel put down

Work, as a teorry

Aways Go on the ieokout for Fellow learners



--- Page 36 ---
Gunng camping:

Weer appropiate clothes such as trousers arid shirts

Ir some camping sites cell phones ore nat clowed

Behicive well

Na boys an ornear girls’ cilities cr vice Verso

Respect camping property such as COraveines, oats and even the ground
Follow fne camping timetable and attend <ll the events

Bo nat smoke ai fhe camp site

Littering af the camp grou odie net allowed. bithering 1 dort ping mobish on the
arcud.

Safely rules during cam ping:

Campires must be supervised all ihe lime and extinguished properly Betore
caving them. Edinguishing ig putting out the fire co mpletely
Hiking or walking on re ads must be done a5 2 Grcup of three or mare. Hikes ore
tong vigorous Walks

No pushing or throwing o membor

Wear life jackets «hen participating in water activities

Swiraming shavid only be done Curing su pervised times ey an adult safeguard
onic in sate ore

Mo horegtoay or dangeras behaviour is dlhowed

Combat games are games where individuals or Tears fight agains aach other
to score points, Examples cf the -ambat games are karate. boxing, jude and
=

wires tine.

Boxing



--- Page 37 ---
a

Tne fallowirig ore mules used in boxing:

- The Boxer must wear proper gecr for the fight

= wear hecd géeorwhich covers the head, oars, cheeks and the chin
= oweorg mouth-guard which protects the boxers teeth

* wear thick boxing gloves

* owed: protective cups for males kr protect the sex organs

sowed? breast protectas for female bowers

For Going bouts, the boxers compete acceding to their werght. age and
expanance. 4 boulis aimateh, This helps te assure the safety of the boxers. Siap a
boul anytinié when a boxer shows aicrs of being defeated.

Shot put

shot put isa physical activity in athielics. A
heavy metal bollis thrawa using one hand,
The equipment wed in shot put can cause
Injunes if rules ore net followed, -

The following are safety wles vse ir shot

put:

* FO ee the fraers wing bondages bulbne
gloves should Be warn

* throw the shot ‘Using one hand asove
height of sheawder

= 7hrowing must be done anly insids the
circle

* Tne shol must be thrown only within dhe marked area

© ihe athlete should leave the circle ‘only from Tie Hack

¢ during throwing ne athletes are alowed inta the throwing area

* towel or rug should be available to dry the throwing oren

Swimming

Iw TING achviliés are exciting bul they
can be dangerous if safety préecautlons
are oct followed. Safe swimming pool: are
suTauUO ded by Oo wall which has a lockible
ote. Safety equipment must be available
in places where they can be seen by the |
svi THT TS. \

The folowing are swimming Pool rules:

* shower before entering the swirrring
boo r

* children legs than 14 years of age must © _.;.: 7
qhvays be actcearnpaned by an cde

uring svimming



--- Page 38 ---
Ne

. odhwoys shower ofter swimming to remave all poo acid

* no pushing each other into the pool

+ ahways wear proper attire such as. trunks and swimming costumes. Stricihy mo
undervear allowed

¢ ne one is dilewed ta swim with open vour dé

* ne food or dank is allewvwed in the pool. or an the deck

« ncanimals in the fenced poci ared

» donot vrollow the pero woter :

» wlinating. discharge of faeces and nase Liewing in the swarming pool is rot
ollowec

» enter and exit the Pool slowly

i er
. z fr

Design a garne in yaur groups which con be played ouldear using any sport
ecurpment. Come up with the miles and regvlotions for ihe game.
Deamenstrate the game to fhe class.

Ln

Why is iFinaportant to Eollow aafety rules ord requiations?

ogre nutes used to conbol the way ohysical activities are Aone,
Name twe rules which must be fellawed ir Ine gymacsium,

Give one cade of canduct used in gyrmnustics.

Store one safety rule for camping,

A match in coming is called a _ ;
Draw protective equipment used in boxing ond write their names.

In shat put. after threwing, the athlete must leave the throwing area only
from the _— of the circle.
¥ Before entering the swimming pod all swimmers must ——_ nel bodies.
1D. Another name for walking as asporis_o

og im fe bo ba



--- Page 39 ---
1, state injuries related te physical acivities.

Rules and requictions most be ebayed in at physical aclities to reduce
acdéigents ard imuries.

Green stick discoloured joants strain bruise

Sofety cules and requiations are imeocant when doing physical activites because
they hep prevent differert types of i qjuries. Injuri@és can occur in sport, or during
exercising. These injuries affect Ihe performance of the athlenes and disturb their
caree: in sport. Most af the people who are alnsk for sport injumies are those who
sre not active fora long time, do not earn up praoerdy before exercse and those
who play contact spor such a3 aby. soceer and handball,

The mest common inpuries in ohysiccl activity are fractures. dislocations, strains
and truises.

4 fracture is o oroken kann. It car be
broken completely ora thin crack al fhe
bane. Te baormes can fracture im 32.ernl
blaces and in many pierces. A fracture
Hoappens when a bone is eushed by rire
force than it con syppert.

Some of the cemman couses ofa fracture
iIPchde:
* falls in activities like soccer, neétcall,
bosketoall,
direct striges to the Body, for exarr:ple. wher hit by a cricket ball or bat
+ car ac¢cidents



--- Page 40 ---
1, Haid Ihe ands of o small green stick. Caretuily break it-

® Hold the ends of a small dry shck, Carefully break the stick.

4. Explain what happens to each of the be sticks as you break it? Which shck
is easier ta break?

Tre dry slick can break easily, The green stick cannot competely Break. This is
what happens when a fracture takes place. bones of adults can ecally breck like
aoary stick and those of young ¢hilcren are like q green stick which Can not brece
easily. They canncl completely break and this is callec the green stick fracture,

Not all fractures con be prevented. Whar athletes can-only de is to Keep ther
bones strong by eating o autritious diet with food nich in vitamin. D and minerces
like calgivim, itis abe important Io exercise regularly. Examples of the exercises are
walking, running and dancing.

A ciskocotion is an injury to a joint, A
joint is a plaése where two or more
bones come together. A dishocation 15 |
when the ends of the joints ore toarced ;
from their normal positians. It causesa |
lat of pair and a pPenen will ret be able
to move the jot. The most common
dislocotians take place in the shoulder,
finger. hips anc elbow, A person
Wilh oo dishocction i not able te move .
the injured part, The joint dislocated disincated bane
wil swell and become discoloured.

Dscolouring is a change fram the

orginal colour to a less pleasing colour.

@



--- Page 41 ---
a

Dislocations can occur in:

= cantact soart such a5 sacncer are hackey

+ falls such as in gymnastics and volleyball

= striking the ball aecidentally uring hands and fingers.

Ta help préveni a diskoacation, athletes should:

» tycond prevent Falls during any physical activity by removing any objects that
m@nhl cause tipping

« play solely by wearing protective clothes in Contact spore

4 shain 6 when a muscle is pull@d or stretched
so that it is torn, This injury occurs ony on muscle
fibres. Strairis can be mild or severe depending on
the muscle torn. If the stein is mild, rhe pain i small
and if this severe, there 16 rrecare px".

Muscle train 6 causad by

2 physical activines that invaive running. juinn piri
and kicking. For exampie hurdles in athletics,
soccer ond basketball ee

« coldweather * Eiquie #4 rec inend ae HR at

»  overvorking muscles - mitted

® Jock Of wd oriimnproper warrtd-lip

In order to reduce muscle strain:

-* warm up must Be done before any activity
= stop anacthyity when the body is lired

= increase time forwarm up in cold weather
* avoid over-stretching

Hold a mbber band using two
finger os shown in the pacture
came” cult it with less force.

Then pull the mober with more
force.

‘Explain what happens fo the
cubber when you pull it with less
force. What happens when it is
pulled with more force?



--- Page 42 ---
“

Tre activity shows wroat hoapmens to the muscles as they stretch during exercises.
The mbber band is ike a muscle which can streich if Force is applied to it. lf more
foree is weed, the muscles can fear jst lke what happeied to the rubber band.
This tearing of the muscles iso strain.

& bruise is co Common skin injury that results Ina change
of colour of the skin. The blood from the damaged part
under the skin collects near the surface of the ak-n, This
causes a dlack or blue mark on The Sear,

A brie GCeCurs,

* when o peson bymps into something a when
gamething bumps inte them. For example, when
a goulkeeper DUMPS into a aod! post ar when a
pleryer is nit by a cricket Erall.

+ when players fall onte a hard surface. For example. when a basketboll player
falls in) the court of play.

isu £ Beuive 0 ocroee

-- oe

Ta preven? bt uises:

. Weor protective gear such a3 snin quards ir contact sport like saccet

 Keeo floors dry and free fron chatter in baskethall or tennis court

+ Remove furniture away fom commen play areas and place T where it belongs

» Remove qechical codes, wire of rapes frerr areas where you may trip and foal
ond place them in a storage bor. -

1 4. —isabroken bone.
4 State two causes af fractures,

3 Whatis the name of the injury shown in the picture?
4. Wrot causes ths injury?

5. Adislocathen fakes piace on a -_— ;

4 Name to sports games where Troctures are common.
ra

5

9

a strain is when a —_—__ is pulled oF stretched Until it tears.
| besoibe how to reduce mvsale strain.
4 cormmon skin injury That resu ts in chanae of colo of the skin is called



--- Page 43 ---
=

Physical activities are important to improve health and fitress.

These can be done in difterent places such as af home, school and the
community,

Same of the physical acrvities are digging in fhe garden. po_naing food,
exercising using skipping ropes and cancing.

Allphyocoalactyities done every doy mustberecornedta monitor our progress,
Pisecseas Coused by lace of nutments are scurvy, rickets, Qoitre. kywasrorkor
and marcas.

Lack of exercises con couse deeqases such as abesity. high blood pressure.
hear diseases and diabetes.

Good sanitary canditions are ne sced in the cammunity ta orevent insectiqus
dseoces such as cholera, dyse-itary, typhoid and bilharaid.

Satety rules and regulations project people frem injuries and accidents.
Ditterent physical activities have wes and reguictions which must be obeyed,
some of the injuries related to Physical activities ora: fractures, diskoacations,
strains and Bruises.

a PROG orm-up, protective c othes: and con! down help to reduce injuries.

+ a

jewellery
korale

fitness
over-weilght
contaminating
risk

pounding
Comrniuniby
campaign

diary

infectious disease

prevertable disacdsas
deficiency diseases

Undermvelgnt
imbalance
bowlegs
nutifional valve
blood pressure

part of whet people wer for beauty such as rings and
necklaces.

q Japanese apor which taqches how to fight using
Fareed ore) gs

Eee rac fit

hecvier fhana narma: eody sire

maken oir:

chances af samething bad happening

Crushing UWsitg oO pestle and menar

4 group of people of he same cusure living tagerher
activities done te achieve a set goal

d recard of expenences

denotes which can spread easily fram one perion ta
qqmnother

diseases which con be easily aveided

diseases which aré caused by lack of some nutrients
inw weignt .

not equal

bent legs like the shape of a how

fhe importastce of nutaents in Food

the force cf blood as it moves through the Bleed

wesgels


--- Page 44 ---
sanitary - clean and “ee Pom garni
dehydration - basing water tom the Pbocy
shagnartt . orl Toying)

boul - 9 fahiing campetitien
regulations - mules offerec| by an oraniation
abusive longuoge «= Bad langyage

extinguish — - py outa ‘ins

Alking wearkirg [ar sleasure O° por
discoloured - change in colar

Choose He coareci answer.

WRESP rie i Tel ppb ytcal ace yt

+. Dancing B. Cyclery 2. Digaing BD. Sleeping

|

had

un

Li

Phe colactiviie: We pie improve _. ;
A, recscirg B. writing =. arcrasing . Threess

what iti name of ihe phygcal act wiy shown in che pict?

4A, dese nding 3. Joacim C yeling Cc. Skicprg
Ase I used in the game ‘acpscecchring i -.—_. -

Al along Bo ReaTaprg cl. sunning DO. rollirg
_ core rues Lpad to control the woy ee ysiccl actives are Gone.

A. AEMS Eo C. regquiatians OD. Paints
Wy hice noe is cota rule used when compared

4. Ceomplires rust be spery ses! 2 Bebave wel

CO. Ne ameak rd O. Utterinig is allowed

s pegich miboxiag i¢ coved 2 —_.

ae. tly eee Pel Fo osecre CG. test

Inageise cul otter lhirow ng. tre dr bhete me eqve ihe throwing areo only ror

be ap he e'rcle.
re B. bate =, eA BD. 'oht


--- Page 45 ---
20.

We one not allowed tea i * fie swimming pec,

A. ect B, glide: CC. submerge Di, Fleacat

4another name for walking of as gadis. WL.

4. camping 3. msuntaineerng C, running D. bikin
Which one 8 nctanintectiqus di ease?

4. Finkel: B Cho era C. Tyoehod OD, dysentery

The first Fnday of every rent wes checlared the . in dima beawe,

4. Woredvs day B. Motianal Aics day

fl. National cean-up coy D. Tecezhers” day

A 5 oo book where yal recard all the chysical acrites done

avery dav.

A. nibble E, dicn ©. dictonay Cotas

.Whoatis the come of the disecse ohown on tie piclure qhoave?

4. Typhiosied B. Sots &. Biobetes D. Rickets
Which disease is caused oy lack caf sxercisa?

Al Typhoid B Gait? ©. Rickets Db, Olegsity
4 disease caused by hack of vitarcan © is called .

A. nckets BR. dicbrstes ©. scurry D. dysentery
hat co uses kwoshacrs or?

A Lock ot viktmins & lock of exercise

©. Lock of minerals &. lock ot proteins

a be dseace in white the body is mat cble to conirol the suger id the

bety.

A. beat ahack B. oleae o. Erise B, Drobetss
Jao... «2 Bo broken bone.

4. Focture B deloc anon Co Sirairl OO. Grice

4 diskocation takes placeana _ .. —_.

AL Mmwsccle Be jcuint ©. bone D. mauth

Answer the following questions.

ia he

ih

High blond pressure ig ——___. {1|
We con contralhigh bleoe pestire by —.__ [2]
Three disecses caused by Poor sanitary ce iitions am 2 |.
ore .. [4]

We con canhoal chalea by dirkiegd [1]


--- Page 46 ---
The lvoe of diarrhoea with blood fs callec woe il;
Tyabod 6 caused oy gern crllec] ___ - fl]

is causes ty worn fovad nm stagner’ werter in dams ane) reer,
ogre utes Used te cenvol ine wery physical aclivifes are done. [1]

mo > 1g bn

——_—_—- +

i]

The nares ad tre injury shown in the picture aceve i , [z]
‘ea strair sawher ag —— —— 3 pulled or stretch aa wedi i] Pears. (Z]

we

Design a diciry of the ahysical activities fora week. Hecord all the infermahon
Cor “he wreck.


--- Page 47 ---
- Ploying in water is a tun activity but ik is aise dangeraus.

5 yy WOT

. colg@shock wotercancdl disused gravel Fat
F stagnant | ‘water

Woler bodies ore good ploces to spend a day. People can spend the day fishing,
picnicking and swimming, However water bodies con be dangerous especicihy
when children are left alone. Many accidents con happen of iuch places if
people are nat careful. Water may ook clean and sate But many hozoards can
take place, _ en .

Some of the woter bodies which can be
dangerous are flooded rivers, disused
gravel pits, wage ponds, dams, and
cornea.

Hooded vers
Flooded rivers can pose dangers to

pecoole especialy young children. If is .
nota good idea fo cross 4d fiver even if i.
you are late, The flowing water.hos alot PT a : Lo
of force which can sweep away anyone 7 of Sele rsp am : : 4



--- Page 48 ---
~~

irying to cross the river. Usucky the flowing iver caries logs and other matenals
which can be a hazard ta the peome crossing the river, Sametimes children swvirr
in flooded rivers especially when the water is low. There is a danger of sudden
Increcase in ftowing water especially during the rain season. Read the néwspaper
Story below.

Children swept away by flash floods

Bvure- The onset of the main rain season has resulted in tragedy in Makade village
where three children were swept away by flosh floods while playing on a dry
river bed. There had been heavy rains upstream and the Manakufa siblings were
playing downstream in an apparently dry river bed, However a flash flood suddenky
occurred, sweeping away the three children playing downstream.

Assistant Commissioner Vusele confirmed the death of the three boys, He
commented that, "The Meteorological Service Department of Zimbabwe and the
Civil Protection Unit is warnitig of a continuation of heavy rains in the following
weeks.

We are warning materist and the public in general net to cross flooded rivers and
bridges. Children should not mear rivers even dry civerbeds, Children shbuld
not swim in unpretected water bodieg such as lakes, rivers and dams as they risk
drowning or being swept away by water currents. In areas where floods might
accur, we urge people te move to safe ground well in time?

We mush follow nets and weather reports, especially during the rainy season we
must take the advice given seriously, We need to follow the advice given te avoid
the dangers of drowning. In some coses. bridges are washed away by the farce
of water. Motorists qe obo woamed of the dangers of crossing bridges when they
ore covered with water.

Siusad gravel ond quarry pis

Diused gravel and quany pts are the
sits left when gravel wos dug from an
ore either far road constuction or
oafher uses. During the rainy season,
gravel pats collect water and look like
dams, Chitten are usualy terepted
to ploy in these pits. [ft 1s dernoeiroes
fo play in these gravel pits. Some of
the pitt ara deap and moy core
drowning. The gravel pits may have

manere 71 Chino staying ina Cased quam sll



--- Page 49 ---
a

undervoter plants, wibbish, dead animals and cor wrecks. These pollute the voter
which makes itursale for swimming and drinking. The temperature of water in the
gravel pits § very low and covses cold shock, Cald shock ¢ the condition of the
human body after being exposed to sudden cold temperatures, Quarry water is
much coider than river or darn werter.

Siagnant water in the gravel er quarry pits can become breeding places for
Mmesquices, Stagnant water is woter that daes not flow. Mosqulloes cause makana
whith 6 0 deadly disease, Bilhawa is dso another disease that can breed in the
disused gravel pit. 4 disused qravel pls a gravel pit no longer in use, These should
be filad we otter Use.

The other danges are jumping. falling, or diving into the pits. Thase may lagd ta
fractures, dislocations ond even death.

Sewage sonds te
These are walker bodies which store sewage,
Sewage is dismased human waste. In some Fie
Ltban arecd, the sewage is transported by
pipes to go place where it is trected, The
water i5 stored im pgnds. Plants and animes
lve in these ponds. Children may went ta
ploy or fish in these ponds. It is dangerous
fa swim or fishin these ponds becouse the
widter is polluted, The woter ana the fish
2£0n couse wohenboame ciseqaes such a5
chelera and tyobold. Figure F.9 & sewoyze pand

Sewage ponds are cangerous places for children fo play. There is Wauohy mud in
the ponds, Theré are chances that a pesen whe swims or plays in the water gets
stuck In the mud and ray drown. ,

Darn

Adamisageodsource of waterforimigatian |
and aelventure activities lke fishing, and
beet cruisirig.

However dams can be dangerous to

people. Some of the dangers ore:

ANNs like cracedibes That con hurt or
kil people.

' Water waves which can even distur
geod swinmerns, Chances of drewning figuee $4 Adem

ae high.



--- Page 50 ---
we

. Undervaterweeds and plant which canentangle swimmers under the water.

» Difficult te get out because of sleep banks.

Water canals or inigatien canals transport
water from a dam to the flaids. The water
is used te inigate plants such as sugarcane
and maize. The cand moy cause water
hazards. Read the story below of what
happened in Byer at Murambinda

Imgatian.

tC
| Murambinde child drowns in canal

d child drowned ina |
hief Nyashanu. Police confirmed the

Iways look after their children, The |
Iwhich wa? 50cm deep and 60cm wide.

child drowned while trying Te cross The card
ing on top of water after he had gane missing.

On & June 2017 at the Murambinda Irrigation a three year ol
-anal. This happened at Mapako Village under ¢
incident ond advised parents and quyardian to a

ge

seme canals are $9 deep that the water flows with fores that they can drown
young children, Thé}water is not sate for swimming because itis airy.

The parents found the body floati
a

yn
A swimming pool is; good place for ewimming and adventure games such a8
water cerobics eeercies, However, ike any other woter body, they can alro

mays Sone nazeanrds.

(c--:

cat

= -—


--- Page 51 ---
a

People who are notable bo oviemn must set enter Ihe swarming pod without help

from adult lifeguards. Other ways of reducing drowning are;

a Swarming GOs miuet be fenced .

« Hove swimming lessons for everyone who will Use the pool

* Be owaore of the pool depth and do not dive into shallow pool, wee shallow
end when leaming

» keen lifesaving equipment clase to the pool at all times

* Ho horeploy at the pools expected,

There are chances of smreading diseases if the swimming pool is net clean, The
follwing precautions should be taken:

Keep the pool water clean by jecting it using approved chemicals

Do not use the pool if you are sick or have open wounds

Keep pets ouF of the pool

De not swallow pool water, .,

Do not swim if you are nat sure@tof the cleanliness of the pool

Use only toys designed for use in sinimming paoals and avard dangerous Obypenc ts
like Qkass and metal

* Stay in the shade when not in the pool te avoid sunbUTT.

a

- + = FF FF &

eee ee

Visit any water body in your crea. Discuss the possible dangers It cam cause fo
pohWdren. What do > you think can be done to raduce the dangers at the water .

| body? ' ov

Name any hwo dangerovs water bocias,

rT.
14) The_____sferecast the possible weather conditions.

:4. Give the reason why itis not safe to swim in quarry pits,
4. Gravel pit hove undervoter — ss sand __ I omidiy couse -
© QIRHATEE.

15. Nome ho activities which ean lagd to Foctyreas, diskacations and death ot
gravel a quarry pits. ;
Give hwo recsons why sewage ponds aré not safe for swarming.

. Adventure acthities done ina dam are and .

. Wotercanas are used far
| The safest place for swionming is the

0. Give favo swimming pool precau{ians.

ie 1. Déscribe how you can reduce drowning in swirnming procs.

=

i ee ee eee

<
1



--- Page 52 ---
& =

ig
|, demonstrate survival rachniques in worer,

Woter bodies such a5 dams, rivers and takes provide water for different uses bul
‘hey can be Cangerous places. List Tree accicents that can happen al unsare
worer boclies.

O (OTS
~ “survival chest compressions
#
> es [Pl wi a Teo

Swimming is a good exercise and a fun adventure activity but it can also be
dangerous. it is important to stay sate in water and if there.is danger we must use
wiring survival skills, survival is the ability to remain alive in spite of an accident’.
same of the survivallechniques in water which you musf learn are:

|, jumping into water

5 ewimming using a side stroke for 25m

a. exiting he pool without ladder

4, ‘teading woler

5. floating an the Sack, face up andout of water
4, equipment for rescuing drowning person

The jumping entry into the evimming pool -
must be clone in oeep water, IF ihe water is > _
known fo be deep, the safest technique is
io enter feet first with a straight bocly.

To jump inta the pol. stand with toes over”
ihe edge of the pool side. Jump from the —
pool side keeping the body stralght and
hands on the side of the body. Bend the



--- Page 53 ---
knees on landing in the woter and ‘ubmerge. Return fo the surface and breathe
in. Practise this activity many times ond remember to always do this activity on ne ;
deep end of the swimming poci. %

Bottom bounce

Jump into the water in the same
woy as for the straight jump.
Brecthe out as you submerge.
Crouch and push yourell
wowerds from the floor of the
ool, Keep yourbody straightand
ROncs on YOur side os you Move
upwards. Breathe out when the
héod if above water,

The a@ctvify can improave your
water survival skills. Practise this
activity many tiraes at the sono
swimming poal,

The side stroke if one of the
grokes used in swimming. The
sroke is named the ade stroke
becovse the swimmer lies an ane
side. The arms ond the legs move
In coposite cirections during the
stroke. it is a Mfesaving technique
used for long distance swimming.
This 5 because 1 does not use
much énergy as the swimmer
Wses only oné hand. To practise the side stroke. swim a distance of 23m an one
sid2 and ihen turn over to use the other side.

Start the stroke by pushing off the
wall into a side stroke position
and float on your side os shown
In Figuce 10.4.

The head of the swimmer should
be in line with the spine one
fumed sidewoys «amd slightly
Upwerds. One cheek and eor
should be in water and the rest of
lhe face above wofter.



--- Page 54 ---
The legs ore straignt and the bottom anm is =xtended forward under water. The
loo arn must rés) flat on tne side cf your bocy. The ndeways positien should be
maintained during the side stroxe,

The mavement of the arms in the side stroke tan os eroctised by sing oranges

wrich arg ina bosest hanging above fhe nec,

2 The ieading arm oicks the oranges while the other arm rests on the side of the
poacdy. The moving orm should brush the thigh.

« os the leading ann oweRps nacewards. the resting arm sweeps forwerd.

» Yourhands meet in front of the chest and ine lagding hand gives the orange
-- the nand which was resting.

» The hands move apart and back te their starting positions. The resting hard
throws the orange away behind ef the end ofthe movement.
Tne movement starts all over again.

i

li he weoter jn thé swimming pool is al ceck ievel, it is simple to climb cut on fo
the side. Some swimme©rs may nove difficulty geting eut af the paoi If the water
is below the level of the pool side. fis Important fer the swirnmers:ta learn an exit
rachniqvue

To exit the pool:

» Place your hands on the pool side with
tre arms shoulder widih apart

© Sink. down into the water

» Arthe some fime pull with ans and kick

« &ring yourshovlders over ine honas

* Push or rell out

fou need to prectise this tecnoique cf

seed. Try It as part of sumival tech regque.



--- Page 55 ---
Using the exiting technique practise, get out of the pel in less than 20 Sonne

Jump in, swim 25 metres using the side stroke and then esi! the pool without a
lomder,

Ll. Name two sunvival feachniques in water.

2. Explain how you can enter the ceep end of tne s~imming pool,

3. Draw ond label three floating oids.

4. Whatis the name of the stroke shown in the picture Delow?7,

Treading woter is when o swimmer “oves
ther limbs tokeep the body afloat in avertical
position inorder to keep their head above the
sUitace of fhe water, This technique is used ta
survive in woter, It is used by swimmers fo rest
wWHFROUT lecving fhe water,

When treading water, make use of bath arms

one legs and keep the body uorght,
Abvoys keep your head obove water
and breathe slowly, Breathing slowly can
Sve YOU ererdgy.

' Move your arms horzartally Ike wines of
o bird flying,

* Move your legs back and forvard in a
circular woy like a person riding a sicycle.

Paint your feet downwards as you move your legs.

* Held on to.any floating equipmen: if you are not able te tisat in water.

lier


--- Page 56 ---
The technique of floating on the back
is good to relax ihe body and have fun.
Footing on the back saves energy Cunning
Suv ITT

in erder to learn to float on the back in
weter you should be calm and relaxed,
You must be able to swim from one end of
the pool to the ether without any helo. Goa
nat iry to float on your back by yourself for
the firs? time. Get help fram your teacher as
shawn in Figure 10.9.

Yeu can abo use arm floaters ta learn how
ta ject in woter on your own as shown in
Figure 10.10:

To improve your floating skills you con:

* Mave your arms behind your head or
meve your arms straight out.

» Moke sure thot your palms are always
facing the sky and fingers are closed.

« Push your back slightly upwards arid lit
your ches? and stomach.

» Bend your knees and lef your legs hang.
» Kick yourlégs up and down To ramain flocing.

itis important te enter the water only if it is the last plan when rescuing a drowning
cersen, Diving into the water and feacuing a pesen may be a sign of bravery bul
+ moy be dangerous. Floating equiament like inflated tubes, balls, and long sticks

mquitt be Used lo rescue a drowning persean,



--- Page 57 ---
Dry land rescue

Fyoucanrecch the person drowning keen
your body away from the edge. Hold on
to something or be supported by another
person whe is. strong. Extend @ long stick,
fowel or clothing io the casualty Full-
inand keep your body welght c=: ‘ar os
posible fram jhe pool edoe.

Practise the rescue activity: Short by wang we
the shallow end of the pool and then use Pl
the deen end of the pool, You need te
toke caution as you work wilh o por ner fo
SUDO you wher you reech oul

if you cannet reach a crowning p2sen
threvv oa flagtable object like a bol, on
infioted tube. These can also be fed! (5 the
end ef o rope. Stand in a throwing pe sitian
away from the edge. Before vou throw tell
The casualty to. prepore te catch. | tne
aqupment is fied fo a rape, col he rope
peice you throw it, Throw within the cara
lhatihe casualty cenreach the equipment.

Rescuing by getting into woter

lf vou cannet reach the drowning meron
o tiraw equipment over ine req ured =="
aistance, you can e@nter the water, cnier
ihe woter to a position where vou can
reach or Frraw: Enter fee? first ane feacus on
ihe crowning person, Throw the flogiable
equipment over head to the coswaly as
shown in Figure 10.15. Aveicd to come too
clase to a drowning person as ney can
arcb you ond end Up pulling you down
with them.

Inoarder to help the pernon who has drowned

the following steps can be follawea:

= Check ifthe casualty § breathing a5 seen
cs they hove been rescued from «voter

* ce someone to call for medical hic



--- Page 58 ---
i

}, Demonstrate the am movement!

Za

lf the personis not breathing or respencing
give them fiverescue breaths eithe throven
ihe nose er mouth

Start chest compressions Using yCUr hands
jhen two oreains. A&A ehest comeression 15
aressina the chest firmly to assisi & perme
io breathe.

#eoea! the same steps until the casuvalty

remy ers.

ANGER

_———————————

z x ceeuelty
Z| , abt uting
fea

va

n side stroke using oranges OF jennis balls.

for helo

instructional
area

a ae Biles

iestructonms:

Look at the clagram showing poolside A Geen woterand where the casualty

—

is drowning, The casualty Is. weak swimmsr.

Explain how you can rescue the victim shouting for help: Make use of The

satu shewn in the diagram.


--- Page 59 ---
Fe La Bo

ie whale aedinemer coc doin co vertical position In order to keer
the head above the suriace of ‘he water,

Give the reasons why floating on *he Gock ts important in swimming.

Nome equipment used in dry lend rescue of a drowning person.

Explain whatyou will do if you cannot reach the drowning person or throw
equiprmert.

Describe bow you CON save cccowned person on land.



--- Page 60 ---
|. erectice front and mock crawl Pechnimues
demeansirate comect diving anc ‘umbling turn Techniques.

bh ewimrming we use different sirokes. In pairs lis five swimming strokes.

ne
yO

a civing Tumele turn AQUa-CerTooOIcs water polo

‘ye con acte: the swimming peal ving ditterer Techniques. We can walk Gown
the sieos. jump or dive. Safety ls ne edec| when doing diving activities. Diving ©
aa swimming actyity of quickly eniening into water. When. diving you must fallow
-hnese safety ries.
. =rotec: the head all the times By siretcning the arms beyond the head
» geo ine head between the ors
» Grio the pool side with ihe Toes
» (Gilde io the water surface after diving

Sractiss diving in deep water abouts fe 3.6 meres.

Tl uu

hiving can be done from the-sitting. kneeling. equating and standing positions.

ou

» Sif on the pool side with nevals
resting an the railg of the padi

» Keep the necd bebween the aris
Push ta iif The Rips

« Stretch on entry

» S65 the oottem of the pool arer
submerging and @ you Come



--- Page 61 ---
* Start fom the kneeling position at the
edge of the pool with one leg in front with
tt tees on the edge

' Keep the head down boteeen the
strelched arms (Tuck the héad)

* Push te lift the hips

* sietch to Sody as you enter the woter.
See Figure 11.2

* Shand an the pool side with lags slightly
apart and the toas of both feet on the
edge of the con!

Bend the knees and stretch the arms
Keép the head between the arrns

Push up te lift the ips

Keep the arm straight as you enter the
WChSr :

* Keep fhe body stretched ynder water

* Stand on the edge of the pool with one
leg in fronkand the other leg halt a metre
back

Slightly bend the front leg

Lift the back leg

Keep the head down between the arms
shetch the body io enter the water

Practise diving fram the kneeling and squatting position,

Pro oochw| tole turn techinig: 3

The tumble tum in svarmrning is a way of turning when you rach the edge of the
pool The tumble tum is turning and twisting in the water so that you swim te the

opposite direction.


--- Page 62 ---
fe

When practising the front craw tumble tum you have ta foltow the following steps:

+ Swim towards the wall of Ihe pool

«) Boe forward roll about a metre tram the wall

» As you do the forward, place your feet onto the wall and stretch your ofnmns

* Push your feel hard ante the wall and twist bac: to the front craw, glide and
continue swimming. :

To proctise the tumble tun you con de the somersauit on a high jump landing

moat. The fron) cred tumble turn in) water ‘5 done in the same woy as the
sormersauit.

4

Practise the tumble in water.

s Swim towards tre wall on your
bok,

¢ Turn fiom back te front

- Do a forverd roll about a
metre fram the wall

» Place your feet onta the wall
and stretch your anmms

* Pusr your feet hart onte fre
yall and stay on your back as
you syim



--- Page 63 ---
To perform the breaststroke turn, follow the

steps below,

Sein foewords the wall using fhe
breaststroke, see Fiqure 11.7.

2 2bouto metre from the wall stretch aut
the whelé body

= Keep your head down and lock at Ihe
battam of the pool

* The fingers of one hand should be — ...--------.-.-
ready to touch the wall

« Push both hands forword ard -ouch
the wallusing anly one hand, see Aqure
11.46

* Swing the orm of the otherhand back | .., :
with foree. This will Gush your feats. inte
your chest

= Bing your other am wh by your ear -—---.----
and Grealh see Figure 11.2

«= Dive your head tack inte water

+ Using your feerpush aff with farce from
the walhsee Aguré 11.10)

* Keep your arms stretched in front of
you see Figure 11.196]

» Move your os up and down as you
Swan using bretst stroke -)

Aqua-gerobics -

AQuUa-GefaAnics ore exercises done in
Aswimiming Pool These exercises are
done with music, Different exercises
such O6 turning. tasting, movement
of arn and legs undervoter can be
done. These exercises improve fitness.
Agqua-aerobics can be done either
an the deep end ar the shallow end.
Goad swimimeans can we the deep
end. The teacher will give instructions .
from Gutside the Poni.



--- Page 64 ---
Water pola

Water polo is an aquatic sport, It is . Co, od
played hy a team of seven players ieee -— Ts
ina swimming pool using a ball The
ball is thrown into the Oomorert's
net fo score, The front crawl stroke
with the heed uo is used to play the
game

Some of the rules of the garne ore:

* Use one hand ta held the ball
But the goadl-keeper can Use
two hands within 4 eres

* Players can pass the hall or pire
with the Ball

» Players are mot qliowed to touch the bottom of the pool. Players trecd woler
ana swirr throughout the malch.

“4
“4.

=—r

Practise ihe following exercises mowater using music of your Chatce:
Morching three steps forvard and backwards
+ Suomerging for 2 seconds
» Jumping up three times
« turning clockwise a right angie and back

5 we

1. Name three different types of diving pasitiens. ;

2. During diving fren “he squat position, Ihe swimmer must bend the —. ——
and stretch ‘he arens.

4 During diving you must keep jhe sss between the stratched arms,

Whet ‘a tumble turn?

5. When deing the back crawl tumble tun, the body myst turn from back ta

e

During tumbte tiring the legs of the swirnmer must _-__ against the walls
of tha pool,

Aqua-caercbics Gre dors in the _. —.

Hew mony players farm a hear ing game of water tocol?

State ane rule Used in waler pala,

4 Marre the siroke used in water pola.

o

om



--- Page 65 ---
age
i

Woter hazards in Zimbabwe inclde drownnd. when creasing looded reer.
playing in cisused gravel pits dnd canal and dams.

The swimming in quanmy ps can cause cold shacks due ta low water
femperotures.

In order to reduce accident of drowning in water bodies we must follow rules
aind regulations.

fe imporlant te earn différeni survival techniques in water such os Feading
water. and floating in water,

We con alo rescue drowning pe cake Using Noting equipment such os inlated
flies and bells.

The ability te swim long distances and exiting the pool without a tadder is
necessary far survival.

Pst And) skills are needed te help c drownirig person.

Sawrrnrng i nade up ot different strokes such as frent cravd. back crv and
breosisinoke.

In oder to enter the swimming pool safely we must oractse differant diving
techniques like diving trom the sitting position,

-iwt .
drving - Jumping inte woter using Read ging hands first into water
Oqud-qerabies - exercises which are done in a switrrning pool pérfarrned
to music for fitmesss
deck _- the flatourface cravnd the swimming pool where swimmers
can dive
. precavtons - sofery mesures that chould be followed
‘lifebuey > floating equipment that can help save iife
seawoge - wWoter ond solid wotte such os faeces and urine
current: - water moving ir a dam dike waves
quarry - cnushed stones wed in roads
casually - fhe drowned person
‘ breastitoke - @owimming sincke in which the swimmer lies face down,
ams swept forvard. outward and back under the water.
Wille legs are kicked like o freg's
deep end » the port of the swimming pool where it is daepest
down - foling fa swim od breath in waler which can cause dealh
floating - free to move on water
submerging - gong under wa'ér completely
woter hazards - These ore ditfarsnt tyees of dangers that can occur in
widter
edd shock - thé woy the bocy responds quickly to sudden cola water

slagnant woter = -  woter not flowing


--- Page 66 ---
™.

breeding place =~ a place where masq vitoes Icy eggs and grow

aniangle _ dtetwist in such away that something is not ecise to remove
survival - to centinue te Ive

eroych - ta bend dawn

chest compressions - pushing of the chest using hoards

tumble tum - terol forward and fun

aqua-aerobics = - exercises done in water performed fo music

wotet poks - awedter game played by seven players using @ ball in a

swiMening paca

ari.

Choose the correct answer.

, ig an example of o dangerous water body.
4. Tom B. Sink
C. Protected well CD. Bisuséd gravel pit
> Tre weather repart the possible weather conditions,
A. drowns B, Eowecasts &, plays DB. recds
3, Gravel pits have yvndervatler_._§- which may qoause drowning.
4, plarts B. jigh ©. germs G. air
4. Which of the following activities can lead to fractures, dislocations at gravel or
quarry pits? :
AS. Fetching water B, Diving
C. Bathing . Bb. Washing clothes
5. which of the following wdTer sources 5 sate for swimming?
A. Sewage pond B, Swimming pool
©. Grove pit D, River
&. Which ane is nota swimming Pool precautian?
A. Keep the pool Caan BR. Do not swallow pool waler

Swellow the water if you ore thirsty’ DG. Keep pets out of the pool
7. Ta raduce drowning at the swimming pocsls -
4. do net swallow the pool water
B stayin a shed
Cc. keep the pool water clean
oO. keen lifesaving equiprient close To the pooh
2. whicn one is nota survival tech wque In woter?
A, Treading water
B. Floating on the back
C. Swimming using a side strake
D. Weoring shoes during si rarcirig
§. You can enter the deep and of the swimming poo! by — —_.
a diving © B. rolling
C. bumble tuming Bb. being pushed by friends



--- Page 67 ---
a
er. Sa

Soeee
feces

ee , . i

10, Whaat is the nearne of the strake shuawn in the picture?
AL Front crovl B, Back crawl (*, Side stroke D. Breaststroke
Bowhala ovimmer can da to keep the head above the surface

of the water while the body is vertical.

11.

4. Treading water BR. Diving
C. Retina on the back D. Subresrgirigy
12. Floating on ihe back helps the sw mimer by ;
4. saying energy B, diving
co. gvallawing water : D. jumping ints water

IS. Equipment which canna be usedt in dry land rescue of a drowning person (5

i ee
4&. rope 8. boat ©. ball. O, inf laked tube

14, lf you cannot reach a drawning persan or throw equiprnent you cam _____ _.
A. enter the pool through the shallow and ond then throw equipment
B. shout oi the perion
june into we ter
D. de dry land résuvsecitahoen

1.0, is type of diving.
A, Slide in B. Jurap in . Tread in GO. Tumble in
lé4. When daing the back crawl lurnale turn, the gady must turn from tack to
A. Pht &, bert . hack PD. front
17. Ounng tumble iuming. the legs of the swimmer must — against the
walls of the Goo.
A, ce5t B. slide ©. push CO. dve
18 Aqua-aerobics aré usualy dane ir. the _.
AL gravel pit B, woter candi
C. sewage pond CG. swimming pook
i ployer: forma team in a name of woter pola,
ALF B, 6 fT. & DC, 4
~ 20. The stroke ued in water polois_.__.
A. breaststroke BAB. sideswore il. front crawl D, back crawl

Answer all the following questions.
1, sd way of enterng walker using hands first.
2. A sater wey of lsarning the diving skills te vee the —__ ot The pat


--- Page 68 ---
Give reasons why quary dams are a dangerous place 1o Sin.

Name two examples of buoyancy aids used tor safety in ewyi PourTurig -

Sicte theo Gangers of sim ming in ca chon.

What ore ihe dangers at stagnant water at horne?

What ig the name of the lifesaving stroke used for long distance swimming?
Eyolain now you cars exit poal without usir g the steps.

bo oe ne Ga

r

9 wheat is the mame of the diving fachnique sown in Ihe picture?
1G. What is the importance at aqucr-cderobics?

11 The Hall of turning under water Is salled —. .— --
12. you cannot reach a drowning peron, — —_.9 floating obyect to rescue.

oe apes weeneters “Pi
Demonsirate ihe fallovang:
1. Sidettroke *
& Floating on the back in wet fer

3. Kneeling dwng



--- Page 69 ---
ele at

4
wa
aides |

|. show preparatory phase tor sprin’s, running ond race walking

2 execube ihe oppropricte sointing techniques pawing action with increased
speed, "y °

wt
te

; i, “i
Albtetics is made up af activities which inciude treonaing, thrawving and jumpine.

‘ r

, lanes pawing action BOFEG

Athletics is one of the spats which can be done at school and in clubs. It is made
Up of many achvities such as mnning, walking. throwing and jumping. Runaing is
made up of sprints, middle and jong distance activities, SeMintng & running short
distance such as 100 metres. Middle distance is munning a distance of more than
800 metres but long distance is running distances 10 000 metres and mare. These
activities are nun ond track which is 400 metwes in length marked with some lines.
these lines are called kanes. When athletes are running. they must keep to Their
lanes in some events such as 100m, 200m, 400m and abeve.

Toimprove our ability to sprint we must practise skills vhich can make us ron Very
fast. Some of fhe activities that con be dane to improve aur apnnling ability are:

» The sefint or crouch start technique

* Activites which con improve the stating technique

r
Zz
cs


--- Page 70 ---
ri 4,09 ty ote rs
eT TEP RS

The spnnt start technique is made up of three siages which are,

a On your marks
« Set
» GO oar gui

WI

When preparing far the sprink start, the
athlete has t@ be comectly positianed.

Place the toe of the front foot 25 2m
pehind the starting line. The knee at
ihe back leg is placed beside the trant
joc. This is done betere the on your
mark cemmand. This prepares the
cithlete for the crauch stant.

This ig the nex! stage of the ereweh start
technique.

aigce the thumb and forefinger or your
hands behind andsparallel 10 the starting
ine. Hands must be showider width apart.
The othe fingers form a high bridge in
order jor the shoulders to be os high cs
posible. straighten your ors ard look
forward ] mete ahead.

(he next stage after the ‘on your TTucar iss:
sage’ ié the ‘set’ stage. The set is the stage
wich prepares the athlete To sprint. At This
stage all the athletes must remain steady.

After ine commend "get set’. the athlete
must take and acid a deep breath. Raise
the bios slignth higher than your shoulders.
Push your weight forward ante your hands
and extend your back leg. The franit ne
aust ferm a fight angle. Look farweird.,

Sere Tt oth! $a5 Wade


--- Page 71 ---
ral

loweards fhe ground of 4 spot ] mete ahead, At tha qgunfgo stage. the athieles
are not allowed ta move forvard before the sound of a starter qun. This can couse
tie athlete to be disqualifed and will nod be allowed to toke port in the evert.

Qin the sound of the starter gun or whistle, Guth
Back hard with yaur back leg, Take your hands
otf ihe ground a5 you dive your body foryeard.,
Swing Your leading lag and take o short step
qs You lean fonvord. Purmp your arms forward
and spnnt.

For your sahety make sure that you use the
Bloper shoes for nrg.

+

There ore many activities thot Carn,be done ta
IMpPIove Your croaqech short skills, The following
dre some of the activities:

Sts be rue

Jog slowly within thé rnarked
area. Or the signal set, each
athlete touches the graund
WIth fingers and thumbs inte
a@ $6 position. Repeat the
activity many times.

=: eae .
ns a Je Ne - 1

Start the activity by jogging
Slowdy. Jump high in the ar
and tum arynd ta face
the apposite direction.
Land inle the ‘set! postion
and drive out of the set

Postion. Repeat this activity ij /
in the opposite directian.

This activity as important to

Improve the movement seinem
ef the bedy fram the sef 7

position.



--- Page 72 ---
Practise tne sprint start jechnique in pain denvanstrating the comect positions.

ra.

The sprink stant helps to drive the
cithlete toraard with speed. During
the sornling, correct technique is
fequirad for tne alhlete fo sprint.
The sqrinting kechniques include:

» Body postion
+ Arm action
* Legaction

4, good sprinting lachnique is toa wee
made vp of the following skills;

* Ronin an upright position looking directty to tne finishing line.

. Bend the elbows at nghi anges and bus. the hips wath hands as yourun. The
hands mus! be relaxed a3 you Fun.

» Run using a high lift of the thighs and aurtie your ars while rn rig.

© Leon forward on the balls of your feel. .

- [he teet must push hard on the balls at ihe feet with sawing achon.

© AS YOU TUN sep with toes ory nat the while foot,

To imoreve your sprinting lechnigue, use the lotlowing mc: tivities:

* High knee marching and sunning wiih leg extension
= Seat kicks

= Sprint wth partner

« Formula one

March forward slowly forcing the
‘high of the leading leg Up faa
horizontal posifian. Land onto
your toes with each step and
push off again wsing toes, The
arms must ba bent at the eibows.
Repeat the activity while run rir,



--- Page 73 ---
Move slowly forward kicking up the
heels ta the back and try to Kir the
bulfecks. Start by running in palace ang
hen move forward at a slow jog, Ther:
ingrense the speed af leg movement.
Always keep YOur arms moving fonvcrcl
and bockweard.

Pi To. Tee

Lising o belt one athlete pulls anather
like o donkey pulling a cor. The athlete
In the role of a denkey wears a bel
around the abdamen, The parther ir
the roe ofa cart haids the ends af he
belt and allows running whist pulling
the bel This activity will moake the
athlete in the male of the donkey work
hard, Both athletes fdenkey and the _
cad} will move forvard a distance ot
1S metas. "

In this activity tie athlete trcrécases
speed slowly overvO metres and then
sprints with maximum effort for 20
melas. Repeat the oc tivity 2 or 3 firmness.
Ths activity improves the athlete's
spant endvrance and develoos the
ability for relaxed! speed running.

A distance of about & ang nin. The
distance is divided into:

= Anoreno of flatspace
® An ared for hurdles
* Slolem pales

Each otnlete starts with a forward rell
ona matand run through the course,
Record the lime token by #cach
arhlete.



--- Page 74 ---
In any race @ good fingsh can make
Ihe athiete win, The winner in aroce is
a person whose trunk oF terse Crosses ]
ime finish line firsl. The ioe is cart of
the numan body fram the shoulders
ta the hips eeclucing ors and legs.

Every athiete snovicd fight had
threugnaut the race fo Cross tre
anishning line first. The race is mat
comalate wntil ihe finishing ine 1 .
crossed, Fe finish ihe race. you rust
cho the: following:

» When you dre abou three sires frorn the line. Bull your arms Back.
» Push your chest and shoulders forvdaid as you Cros: the bine

e Keep ooking ahead

» Do natiook uraund at the other athletes.

- ee 1.
1. Nome the three sages of the sarint scart
2 Running is made up of _.—_... ard _. distance activities,
3. The iimes marked on ihe wack are called . _.
4, During ihe sek.posifion, you aust raise Ihe ——__—_ lightly higher than ihe
shiaulchers.
5. A. _ pb used to start a running eventin ofhiletics.
6 Durirg cunning. tne feet myst pusn hart an the —___— of the feet ‘sith

powirg achon.
7 Allrunning events which require speed ars called

8 What is the name ol the position shown in the picture cove,
6 The winner ina race is fhe one whose — crosses the fnise. line first.
1G. Describe hwo skills that make up the soriniing technique.

a



--- Page 75 ---
1. show preporctory phases for middle and lang distance running aid race
weolkirig
2. Gemonstrate a higher level of endurance rn fairly lang distance events,

é . . te ae 7 7 eS a

4

thy stort cross Caunin, race walking

Jat like the sprints: the ruddié and lang digtanéeé running are made up of the
corect slactireg techniques, The starting technique used in middie and long
astarce is called the flying start or standing start, The fly start is the start of a race
where athletes begin from sanding or spright posifion. Some ot Ihe activities which
can be done to improve the running ct middle and long distance events are:

* tne fly stort lechnigue

* activities to improve running

The fly shart is mode up of two stages namely:
«On your marks
* Go/gun

ak

Stand with your feat shoulder width apart.
with your powertyl lag betund the starting
line. Most of your weight shovid Be on
the front leg. Bend ihe knees and lean
forward, Put the fet foot fonvard and the
ight arn forward or the right foot forvard
and the fet aren ferwdrd. The back, mé-ck
and hea should be in ling as you lean
forward You are not alowed fa meve =
the body fram this position.

4
i



--- Page 76 ---
At the signal ‘Go push your oody
forward swinging your arms backward
and forvarc.

"oro: Teas

Wher ruoning in lang distance races you

moust do the following:

e Kor with the body upright

* Strike the ground with the heel first
and then the toes for the push off
from the ground

» Relox your aims and lighthy move
them tenvord and backwards a3 you
ruin (See Figure 1.4)

* Breathe normally

. “bre Ald L “ 1
oreactise and demonstrate the fly start 1é ehnique in athlehcs.
eee cw mre Ge ST

We can impefave our middie fo long dislance running by practising the Feslkowirig
gomes and activities:

« Ayai-Awor game

© T4minvte middle distance mn.

e  Croassencuntna fun run

The game starts with theo
groups of equal numbers.
The lading group
represents “hyends’ while
the other group represents
the sheep’. The hyenas
munte catch ihe sheep. The
sheeo run away fror ihe
“yengs Until hey get te the
cpposite goal post.



--- Page 77 ---
The race is run by teanis of about han
members each. Boch learn has io rue &
fines cround a coupe of about 200 rm.
Each team member's fire is recorded,
The team's score 6s the sum of each
members results.

To practise long distance running. cro<s-
country and Fen run activities can be
Lised. Cress-country § 9 race mn over
different places like hills, grass. mydely
Bloces ond cressing rivers, A distance of
about 3 km con be wn. Cress-country
Faces ore Usvally done as a competion.
Fun run activites on the other hand also
are not competitive bub are just dore
for enjoyment. As you take par in tre
races. vou should record the time using
‘a stopwa teh,

Race walking so long distance walking
event in athletics, Although it is a foot
race, if different-tram running in ina
one foct must be in contoct with the
around at all times. 4 distance of dpout
= kilometres i walked.

The sallowing must be practised ta

Pn pow POC wicked!

» Head shevld be upright ond eyes
iooking 20m in font of you

4 Relax neck and shaulders

* Arms should be benl at élbows cll
Thee tire:

= Swing your ans forvard and
backward cnd keaap hands close ta
thre ody

* Avoid leaning too for forward

= Landon the heel of tha foot

© Rotate your hips

« Avoid long strides which make your
freed.



--- Page 78 ---
. Athlete must never have both feet off the ground at the same time
» The leg moving forward must be straightened not bent at the knee when The
foot firsl makes contact with the ground uctilit is vertical.

1. 8%50m walking relay

« Stond in grouos of & one behind
the other in a singe file

« fhe leader will stand hoiding Go
ater near the starting line

* From a signal the leaders walk
following fhe cause of of m
and then pass an the baton to a
meriter on the back of the file

» The actyity continues uniil all
the member of the group have
walked the 50 m race

» Record tha time taken by each
SOUP, y

7, Handicap walk :

In this activity athletes are grovped according to their ability to walk. Thre groups
are formed. A walking coune of two kilometres Is marked from the school gate
Is ashdeping ceftra and back. The first group of athletes to walk is that of the
slowest athletes, The next group will start walking ofler 2 minutes. All the athletes
ore axpected ta finish the race af the same time.

What is the name of the starting fachnique Used in long distance running?
How many coromands are wsed in miadle running?

Describe how the long distance race is tun,

What is race walking?

Explain one rie of race walking.

A race run over different places like hills gross anc crossing civers is called

oe un Bs in BI

Aninsirument wed ta mecsure the titne tasen during a race is called
§ Describe the technique used in race walking.

vA

&


--- Page 79 ---
|. execute corect boton exchange
2 denonrnshote aparopiale fachnigques in hurdles,

Relays ore run by teams of athletes who poss the baton te each other in turns
uNnMl ihe race fs complete,

Rey wos on .

--E

lag baten Fare bess.

The relay is one of the most exciting evenisin othietics. In most competitions. tia
rélay i¢ Ihe last event. itis a team event in which athletes sun a certain distaice
collad a leg. A tube colied a baton & passed on by gach runner ot the end of

ach leg. One af the relay event is the 4 * 100m.

a

Tre ralay boton is a smooth hollow tube about
30 crn long aad 12 cm around, It can ize made
of wood, metal or plastic,

Botans ore usually coloured to moke them aasier
fo 38.

=.

Baton exchange is the passing on of he baton by one athlete to the next ina
relay, There ore differant techniques of massing Ihe balan. These are:

= THC Upsweep oss
* The downeveem poss

Inbaton exchange. the hand of the athlete passing *he baten is met the sare cs
the band of the cthlete receiving it. For exannple, if the athlete is passing the batear
using the right iand, the athlete must receive with the left hand.

‘”


--- Page 80 ---
The upsweep is a safe and easier technique in baton

exchange,
» The athlete recenving the batan stretches out the y-shape of thumb
receiving hand, palm downwards and index finger

«© The thumb ond the index finger should form a ¥-shape

» The athlete passing the baton brings it up inte the “yf
of the receiving athlete, see Figure 14.2

» The athlete passing must held the first quarter aft the
haten and the receiving athlefe helds The second

quarter
> The athlete passing the boton must leave: the baton

when the receiving athlete has grasped it year Ere
» Thereceving athlete should olvays be locking Gnead. 9 sot: | -caree

The dawn sweep technique ¢ the quicker of the twa techniques of bofon exchange
but it requires mofe practise. In this technique the athlete receiving the baton

must hold ann higher to receive the baton.
, b

=H] ol)
Poe eee. ~

+ The athiet= passing must hold the
end at ihe Botan

» The receiving aihlele pushes the
receiving hand back palm facing
Upwards

s The athlete passing the baton pushes
it downwards into the palm of the
stretched hand. See Figurel4.4 b3]

» The athlete receiving must farm a
Woshape with the fingers and thumb a

: The receiving athlete must grab Fiewe 743 he dewnsweep ieston axatincuens 2 he

the baton firrnly



--- Page 81 ---
a

Fraochise make: perfect You con
improve Your baten #xchange
fechinique By doing the folowiag
achvities:

* Foon grouos of fen

«Stand in ¢ file factng Ihe otier
group of ten members bering a
Iie abou: Sor ovary

«The first nner holds the bottom
of the bator in the right hans

= Onthe signal Go' serint to the are-er file and poss the boten te the receiver's
night hard using o downto movement

* The recercer must stand fehind the line wilh the righ arm open facing upeyard

+ Waboh the baronas you receive itand if it drags quickly pick It wp ano cantinue
minning ,

+ The passing oihlele joing he other tearm using the right side of the file.

s— 1.4m —+

* Stand 1.5m metres apart, one bebind the other

« The olhlete at the back halds the fearon

« Athlete posses the boton with the left hand to the ight hand of the athlete in
front

» Aferreécening, ihe athlete must pass to the lett hand of the othléte in front

* The last athlete willreceive the boren using the rignr hand

* The athlete passing must show 'boten’ for the athlete in front to receive it,

Thiachyity canbe done by walking so che nézl athlete to hand over the Keaton, The
activity can also be practsed using the downsvreep baton exchange technique.

Left to rightioaten exchange.


--- Page 82 ---
f

~ The first athlete holds the bottem: of the baton in the heft honed
. Bun atid poss if inte the ght hand af the next athlete 10m away using tre

down Ween
» as you approach the rec ever, shaut ‘batas! for the receiver ta push the r.ght

hand backwards in arder to aeaive the baton
«© Continue possing with the left ond receiving with the right mand,

this activity tne distance ond speed of running can be incraaéed.

Prictse and demonstrate the dow word sfoep technique.

Hurcilirigy 15 qa ‘ace in athletics where athletes are expected te Tun Over obstacles
colled buddies winch are set at different distances an He feck. The athletes must
runcwiti speed over ihe hurdles. One leg must be leading during burdling and tne
same leg must be used thraughour the event,

The height cf the burdies for athletes at Grade 4 level ie 7 crn for gins and a4 cm for
Foys. For totety learners chou net jump ta clear hurches, To improve the hunting
technique, the hurdler must practse the icllowing enctivities:



--- Page 83 ---
Se biel

Sit down on the floor legs stretched
Bend your right feg os shown on
Figure 14,70,

Swing your oars forward and
backwards as f you are linning
Bend your Hody so that your hands
reach the ball of the Foot ,
Rot in this position for & seconds
Change the position af the legs cane
repeat the exercise

This eeercise wil Improve the skill of =. -
running over a hurdle

Held your partners wrist for balance

Place your back leg about 40cm team the front teq. See Figure 14.11 9)

Your partner must bend his lees as you come forward

MAcve forward with your back leg and pass the knee over the nurcle. ee
Figure 14.11 By

Point your toes outwards as you do the movement

As you land keep your knee high cs if you were sprinting. Se Figure 14.17 <|
Exchange the rales and continve proctising.

©


--- Page 84 ---
» Staa in single file. om
away from the firs! obstacle

- Walk aver the obstacles using
the same leg throughout

» Pun ever “he obstacles
clearing ther using the
game lechnique

» Alwoys cemember the
leading leg is not changed
during huraling.

“ign f Boba At. a PRD nt eo aTNE Ta,

eeeere: ied
Demonsirale the hurdling technique using low obstacles over a distance of
100m.

1 Aditance rur by one athlete inc relic is calkecd —_.-—_.-
9 What is the length of a baton Wsed in relays?

4 Theaskil of pasgng on the baten to ihe next athlete in relays ig called
d

5

The technique of passing the boton uoward is called the -
inthe downsweerp technique ihe athlete recehving a baton Toust forts a
with fingers and thump.

The obstacles ysed in hurdling are called —
The heignt ofhurcles for primary school level girls is
Explain Por the downsweep baton exchange is done.
In olkhurdie races the —__ —_ legis not chonged.

“OG



--- Page 85 ---
we ove. inn

1. execute hodzontal jumping techniques
2. Sxecute verical jumpng techniaues.,

1 ee) “2G oer
: = oy
ota eet “?

a
“aa

Jurcps inathlerics are grouped as horizontal and vertical pumps.

i 5

herzontal jump  verti&ial jump checkemerk flap technique

Jmping isan actiyity in athletics which is done on the field not on the track. The
fleld is the arec sumounded by tae ath etics track. Different sections of the field are
moked for different tyoes of imps ond other teid events such shot put. disce's
ard jovelis:.

AUTIBING Pequres a jumper ta be fit and skilful. Jungs are divided ints ted
categores namely horizantal and yertical, Horizontal jurnos are long jump and
tiple jue, Vertical urs ore high jure and pole vault, Alljurmips are made up of
the folioeving stages:



--- Page 86 ---
* ogpPprodch or run-up

* take-off
- flight
« landing

The two tyoes af horizantal jumps are long ME and kniple jurrip
Sofety is needed when doing nenzontal jumps.
Priar fa competition

* Aadays dig tha sand for cate bormcing.
» Remave opject like litter or glass frarn the sand.
« Always jump fram non-shp surfaces,

The long jwirp keke any other jump is made up oft approach nun; foke-off, flight anc
landing stages a: shown in Figure 15-2 below,

Fun up or dapprocach
+ Stan your run up fram the same spat each time with both feet together. Run

wery fast to reach the take-off beard which is pointed white,

Toke-o'f

* Push hard onto the take-off board wilh fhe same foot each time. As you Take
off thraw your arms up with torce tn a motion. At the same time bring your
rack leg up dnd fonward. Look vp as you ITE,



--- Page 87 ---
aw
Flight
¢ Flightinvelves the movement in mid-air. Try to gain os much height a8 you can,

Landing
* as you go dewn. push forward with your legs, arms and the truck. The heets
must hit the sand. Quickly push your arcs back to force the whole body to

move Fornvoard,

Activities which can be done to imp ove long jump are cl} distance jumping
6) run up using Checkroicdk
eh jumping from o low box

da. Distance jumping

Toray Bishi co augnping

» Jump from 4 line marked on the ground using two feet.

= Jump three omnes non-stop,

* Measure the distance of the thres jumps,

* Inoorderte get the longest jump, all three jumps must be equalin length.

Avoid jumping upwards out jump tow and forward.
b. Run Up wing checkmork

* A checkmark is co mork CUT at the edge of the track
about thirty metres from the take-off pear,

Start with both feat together opposite the take-off board,
Take o sep fonvard with your take-off foot.

Run nine strides back Gown the nin up.

Mork the ninth stride. This becomes your staring pani for
the run Up.

= Turn to face the loke-off board, Flace the norn-jumping

foot on the mock, " i
* Fun up through the take-off board Info the pit many | -

times.



--- Page 88 ---
c. Jumping from o.low box

Ae

oye a

* Pun up three strides and step ana law box on the third stide.
+ Take-off from tre box and land inte the sav.

Tre box shovid be supported by twa people +o thal it will meat tip.

7
4

Triple jump is abe a henrzental jump like long ‘ump. Itis made Up of tree jumps
which are hop-stepand-junip. Just like long jump it has four stages namely: run
up, toke-aft. fight ond landing. the three jnpes which are the hep-stepand-jump
are dong alter the Jake off stage.

The runic. take-off, fight and landing for triple jUrnp are the same as in long jump.

«The first three pictures show the hep stage.
» The middle two pictures show ihe step stage.
» The last ta pichures shew the jump stage.


--- Page 89 ---
a

ACtyities tO Mmporove tiple jump skills ae al robert hops

Gb) combining hops and steps

ec) hop. stet aod jump sAythm

dd] standing triple jump inta the pit
a. Rabbit hops

« Stand with feet together -

* Toke off from the hwo legs jJUpIrg horizontally and land on hwo legs bending
YOLTRMGeS§.

+ Coritinue the jumps up to three times.

Always remember ta bend your knees when landing te aver muscle strain.

b. Combining haps and steps

See a) er ee
Practise the three jurmps wsed 'n tiple jump cs follows:

* Hop bwice and step once.

* Step tice and jump once.

© Hep Pace. "op once and jump once,
* Hop hice, step twice and jump once.


--- Page 90 ---
¢, Hop, step dnd jump rhythm

* Start form the shanding pasition
« Roun. and iake aft.
» Hop, stap ond jump.

d. Standing tiple jump intc the pil

* Start from a standing pesitian on the side ia
the jumping pit.

- Hop. step and jump inte the pi starting Fram © : :
distance of four meres fram the pit. PO

. Proctise the activity increasing the distance os
from the pit as shawn in the picture. 2

Practise the Iaple jump technique using hula hoops and damonstraie the
technique to your teacher,

Yertical juris are jumps that are done for height. The athlete must mp over a
Horizontal supported bar. The jump ts performed in tne field just like the horizonta.
mips. Examples otf vertical jumps ae pole vali and high jure. YVedcicol jumps are
elo rade Wo of the following stages:

Run UG

Take off

Flight of bor clearance
Landing

2s ss 2 &

Safety ip needed in vertical (Umps-



--- Page 91 ---
Ahwioys jurop from a non slip surfaces,

AMmpIng fron wet grass if dornge aus,

Wear well-Atting jumping shoes with spikes

Use suitable hagh jump bed for the Aop technique. A technique in high jump
wee @n athlete jumps Geckwoard over the Bar landing on the mat with
shoulders and back,

sjradoe,
a
a

A]

In high [ume we use cifferent fechrmcues fora good pertornance.
a. The scissors kick technique
Proctise this technique using a sandpt

+ Apprcach the bar fram the right or
jert

* Joke five to fén springing 4: fepE aL
you Approach the bar

« Toke-off using Gne leg

= PUSH Your arms up as you take-oft

*  Liff your Back jeg over the Barin 3
scsors movement Ficere fault THe suilncrr tug hacer es

* Straighten your legs as you go over
ihe Exar

«Landon the front leg.

Stand 3 to 5 steps away from the bor on the side you prefer, $6f the bar at waist
level Run aad (ume using 1 fhe scissors syle, Rose the far os yOu Improve.

b, Fosbury flop technique

The Fecbury technique
i abe called the
approach becquse
the run ug i J-shaped.
In this technique the
urMper lands on the
back on a mat.



--- Page 92 ---
The flop style is made up of the fallawang:

ADDS
» Your approach run sheuld be Bignt ta tary
STs,
» The first four strides are siraight in order te allow e
you ta build up speed. it
» The second fourstides cre curved to bring you +f
Lp te the bar. |
« The-ast four strides must be shore: and quicker. 7
“yore TE ESI geo Le

Take-off
+ Lond on your heels and bend your legs.
s Rotate your pady as you loke-of.

Ber ciearance
» A Bock ond bring legs fagether
a Bend knees and lift feet over the bar

Leardir ig)
© Tuck your chin inte the chest and land on your back an the rat
activities to help impreve high jurnp skills are a] ihe curl
bp backare |
c| carve sprinting
d] backward jlurnp
a, The curl *

This activily stretches the muscies in your back and

helcs prevent injuries while you are FUrAping.

+ ‘ja floton the Flooran your back.

« Pollyourkneesante your chest,

» Pull your chin wp fo your creel.

» You must feel the stretch in your back wher you
curl Up.

b. Back are
This activity eases un the musches ON YOUr back,

+ Le on the floor and place your hands Uider
your shoulders.

. Keeo yourhips on the ground.

FUsh up slowly with your arms unl the Uoper

body is in an upnght position.

Hoid the streaich for about 10 seconds.

* Lower your body back to fe starting poasihon twine EG Padre. nad

and rapect,



--- Page 93 ---
a

c. Curve sprinting

The activity helps to improve the curved flag run Up. See Fig™ure 15.14. As you run, :
leon inte the curve and you should rot slaw the running speed.

qd. Backward jump

Practise loke-off and landing on the

mot,

© Arrange Ihe mets to farm a pile,

a Forme owoy Poon thee sais,

- Jump Upward landing Gn yoaL-
back with legs up in the air.

* Your body skaould farm an enc as
YOU JUMP.

Practisé this octiviPy several times betere using 2 low bar. Ge the some acteity using
Gow horizontal bear.

we

Another yerticel jump is the oole vault. 4 strong metallic pole is used fo hele on
jumping,



--- Page 94 ---
The pole vaull is made up of the folowing shades:
* Approach

* Rem Lips
« Toke off
+ Flight

Larging

Ap aradch

» Hold the pole with your favourite hand aT the too and the alher hand between
adern and 40cm lower dowel.

« The thumps and fore fingers of each hand should be te the tom of the pale.

- Bin towards the harizental bar and push the pole to the ground

Take aff
» Sump up pushing the pole upratearcs

Fight
«= Bering your fight turn your body so thal you wall face “he opposite direction
» Push the pole se that it wil not drop on the horizental bar as you jump over The

hor

Landing
» Land on the mai on your back.

‘ne
be oF

[

The pole fault requites a lat of practice, The following ontivitias will Fal you fo
learn pole woul:

a. Swinging on the pole from

qi shart run vp ;

* Your teacher will hold
the pole while one end is
eioced in the land jurip
sand pit in a sianting
poslian

* Bunup and grab ihe pele

- Swing through 10 lond
in the sand or pole vautt
landing mat,

THis activity will help you to find
which side of the pole you wil
gwing or. before running ua.


--- Page 95 ---
a

6. Pulling up and retating on o rope

Lié on the fear and at the some time hold onto o rape
Rotate on the rape a3 shown in Figure 15.20.
Pull down hard and look back gdewn on rhe floor ta start the rotation,

4

This activity halos you be able to rotate and
do the upward movement on the pole. It
also helps the anns and shoulders ta 2ecame
trong enough to perarn the pole vault,

c. Swinging on 4 repe ond lifting the knees

* Place aymnasiics roots beqesth the
Bwingng dreg

Jump and grab a rope using tea hands
Swing your body Upweords

As you swing Bend arid fft your knees

Try *a touch the rope as high os possible
WIPRO WU Knees ond tect,

4. Swinging into a sand pit from ¢ low helghi

® Stand ora drum or table

= Plont the pole inte the sand ct tre take-off
end of ateng jump pit

= Look forward on the right side of the pole
and swing on the left side ef the pole

4 Swing forward onle thé landing pads ar
sand pit.

"hoe 48 GS. 2E Sareea ce ree


--- Page 96 ---
1. Nome 2? cotegories of JUMPS.

3. What are the Eour stages of ali jumps?

4. Give one example of horizontal jumps.

4. As you land on the sand push forward with your dnd __.
5. Triple jump # made up of _——_. . ——— cnc] FIs

6. Examples of vertical jumps cre —__ and ;

7, Explain two satety precautions in vertical jITES.

6 Two examples of techniques used in higih jin cre and

9. The tyoe of vericaliumpe where a long metel pole is used is called the
10. Durng the flap technique, the -__ — of the jumper must be arched.


--- Page 97 ---
1. demonstrate the carrect handling of implements
2. @xecute comect throwing techmiqves in a marked cycle.

1
4

. woe
2 gt

+: Pry

beat
There are diferent throws in athletcs. The throws are discus, avelin and shot
put. Shot pot and discus are exqmpeles of rotational throes,

Ly WOT: “, .
irnpleme nts spectators field event

Throws are sone of the events done in athletics tn the field, Sorna of the throes in
athletics ona disciis. shot put and jovelin. All throws should be proc tised before the
othletes can pertorn well [nail threes the athigtes wee equipment which should
be handled and thrawn in Go morkec! aréd, these are called implements. Thicns
qe mode Up of the following stages:

* The grip
= Throwing acer

Thes@ cre the main stages of allthe rhrvows and the athletes have to practise (herr.

Safety 5 needed in all throws, All the equipment for throws con cause accidents
ta the ofhletes or the spectatars, Spectoton are people viewing an athletic
activity, This the reason why mest farce take place from inside a cage ks aveid
accidents, Ror throws like discus the throwing araa must be protected by a fence.

The shoal is a field event thet involves thravend oa
pulting a heavy solid Grass or iron Ball called the shat
as far as oossible. It weighs about 3.25 kg.

The stages in shot put are the oip. alacing on the

neck, stenée and the push or throw.


--- Page 98 ---
a. rip

- Hold the shot at the base of the fingers cind
retan the palm

« The fingers are well spread apart ard we
the thumb te support the shot

» The pond israned and held back,

b. Placing on ihe neck

» Raise the shot above your head

» Lower the shot straight dawn Wniil itis under
the jaw as shown in Fiquea 14.3

- Posh the shat into your neck

* Lif your elbow uniil if is parallel to the floor

* Point the calm to the thraving direction.

ec. Stance

+ hand facing opposite the throwing dared

«Lean your bady forward as shown in Figure
14.4

» Body weight shovid be an ‘the front
s_poarting leg

+» Tre chin, knee and toe af the front lec
should be in ling with each offer.

FA Py

d. The push
» Glide ang iist the hip rotating
the body

* Push the shat over hecde from
‘he Hand and follow through.

The shot should land in a marked
areg. Figure 14.5 shows all the
stages to be followed to camplelte
the throwing in shot put.

Ta practice the different ways of
performing the shot pul tara. you
can alsa do the folowing acilvity:

z 4
ie


--- Page 99 ---
a. Push throw

* Hold the casket or soccer
boll using hwo hands

= Recoch bock to the side with
He ball in both hands

4 Tweet the body  fonvord
leaving the boll and the
hands back

* Move to rhrcw fron this
position.

Demonstrate the shot put threw from the standing postion using the shot put
throwing ore. :

Name feo types of throws in athletics,

| Which lye of fhrow must be done inside a fenced area to avoid accidents?
. Whartis tha name of the equiprrent vsedin shot out?

Explain te rip in sheet put,

Waich part of the body do you place the shot hetere you throw?

All throws shauldlandina., .  arec,

1.
2
4
4,
4.
i.

Discus 5 0 field eventin which an vathlehe (hrows
a heavy dc called discus. The discus is thrown
within a maked qed for distance. 4. field event is
sporting centents that do rot invalve running such
OS jumpng or firing,

Zw eg ig

A discus § made of mbber or wood surrounded by
ao metal im,

mné standin throw tec 2

The standing throw is one of the techniques Used in discus throw, The following are
stages of The danding throw technique,


--- Page 100 ---
The discus grip

Hald ihe discus loosely in ihe palm
of your thrawing hand

Cingers can be soread aut evenly
an the discus

Use tne thumb io keep the discus
iri pecesthan

Slance

Stang with your feet hip width
dian, sideways of the ihrowing
oned

Shghiny bend your knees

Turn your body a8 You extend your
arms backwards

Sing the discus tanweard burring
your booty to threes ard Tolar
through

The discus should land ina marked
ore. .

Figure 16.10 shows all the stages of the discus standing throw technique. 1c pertect
yout discus troy skills, YOU CON do the following activities:

fowling the discus”

swinging a rubber ring

Hold the discus using tha comrect
technique.

Put one beg in frent.

Swing the hand with the discus apposile
the front leg forward.

The discus should roll forvard os shown
ini Figures 1d. 4 | moc TA 12 The Gawler ce we

Hald a mbber ing

Step torvard

Swing oT throw the ing trom
showider Upwards.



--- Page 101 ---
a

Throwing a ball from a sitting position
+ Sit down and split your lags as
shown in the picture

= Hold the ballin one honed

* Swing the hand backwards and

ferward releasing the ball from
shoulder Up orcds.

Cemonstrote the discus grip and the standing throw technique.

4
Lt

Jovelin § a field event just like discus and shot put it invelves threwing a sharp
metal abject like a speor called a javetin-

I ac
Shalt Fhe td onp'kinding Hea

The poavelin has a metal of wooden shott with a boainted metal head and the cord
gic or hinding.,

There ore different ways of grip in jovedin, The grips ore the middle finger and the
forefinger grips.

forefinger grip middle finger arip

In the forefinger grip. the forefinger is placed behind the binding of the javelin.
Inthe middle finger gnp, you grip the ‘qvelin with your middle finger and thumb.



--- Page 102 ---
In the mnup the javelin is camec high vp above shoulder with ihe palm of the

hand facing upwards,
Amweys ceep the mul Upwards throughout the thiaw. Build speed on your

qppoash mun,
In the last strides of your mn up stretch your throwing apm back so that the

povelin is behind yaw. . a

Lean hackwcrd

Ofve the hand with the javelin forward to sebease the javelin.

Keep your elbow high thrayghout the release 50 that the javelin goes high
dbave your head and shoulder.

Release the javelin with a follow through.

NB. You must remain behind the throwing Ine. Crossing the throwing line wall
disqualify your threw,


--- Page 103 ---
Pa

Activities to improve the javelin throw include 4) running tea handed throw
by extending the throwing arm
©) reach back ta throw

4. Running two hanced throw

tee TR PRs tt crepe

= Hold the bollin feo hands above the head

* Stand shoulder width apart

© Pun two or three strides

* Lean bockweords dnd throw the Ball torvoard with a follow through, sée6 Figure
14.18.

Bb. Extending the threwing arm

fo BR iwhees ey the dhrowing omen ov

* Held the ballin the throwing arm
* Extend the Ihrowing arm bockwords ond ot the same time stepping forvaord

with the opposite leg to the throwing arn see Figure 14.19.

This activity will help you fo extend the throwing arm during the ror ue in javelin.

F
i


--- Page 104 ---
o.

Reoch back to {hraw

ata

Place several tennis balls en a taple a8 shaven in Figure 146.20

ocd nfront of the table so that the balls cre behind you

Stand with one leq in iront facing a hanging hoop

Recch back to grasp o oalt only by turning the upper part of your broly
Tor back to the frartand threw inte the hea.

= — wore

os ,

nemonstate the middle finger and forefinger grips used in javelin.

aj bi ai
Wherore the normes of the implements shown in he pictures above?
Nome neo matenals used te manukacture discus.
Exotain the disces orip.
Oroaw ayovelin and label the following pars
» Head
« Shoat
Cord gp
State hwo types of grips Used in javelin,
During tre run Ua the javelin is comed hignup above the _.
In javelin all tiroywers rust remain behind whe __ ine after throwing.
Explain the throw stage in javelin.

—--.-———-

oi

aoe an

— — 2


--- Page 105 ---
Pd

Ld * + HF LJ L | a

LJ -_ + «@

"hm
. ae

Afblebcs if mode up of four arcs namely ronding, «walking. throwing and
jumping.

The sprint or crouch start is used in afl sprinting races,

fhe cerimends "on your marks’, ser and “go' are used 1 start a sprint race.
The forse is used in finishing aracs.

The fying start is used in long and middle distance running.

Roce walking iso long distance waking event which is about 5 km.

A relay butten is o hollow tube about 30cm feng and 12cm around.

Twe types of outton exchange ore the uosweep and the down sweep,
Hurdiing i on event where cthletes are exoacted to run over abstacles called
Hurdles.

JUMBS ore divided into twa categories which are horizontal ond vertical,

Alf jumps are made up of the following stages: mun up. take off. fligat ard
landing. . ;

Leng Jump and tiple jumps one exarnples of howzental jumps.

Righ jump, and pole voult are examples of vertcal jurnps.

Discus, shot put and javelin are tyces of throwing events in athletics.

The stages in some of the throws are the grip, stance and throwirg.

catary  *

‘endurance running - being able te run 4 long distance without getting easily

fire<
spuinting i o— running very feast
lap “= MAAINg @ 400 m distance oraund the track
.creuch start ~ thé type of starting used in a spant race
‘foro — the upper port of the body form the waist to the neck
Upsween — Wievard movement of the baton in relay race
horizontal Jurrigt - Tyee ofa jump where distance is measured
:Werical jump — fype of jump where heght is measured
flop sivle — @ style of jumping in high jump where the J-appraack is
Wed dnd the cthlate iands on the back of the body on
landing mat
‘lanes - fines which divicte the race track to keep rmenners apart
baton -— df object transfered by runners in a relay race
obstacles - equipment usec in hurdles
- powing acon - the movernent of the leg to [he ground using the front
pdrl of féet woen sonnting
starter gun - 8 Qun Used te start a race
stopwotch - instument used ta measure the time taken in races
checkmark — amork vsed during run ue in horizontal jermrips
cun - curved
Limplements = &Quipment used in throws

+


--- Page 106 ---
Cheese the comect answer.

1.
Z.
a.

onthe downsweep technique. the athlete receiving a baton must form oO

The height cf hurdles for primary schol level gins i

The sprint start is made up of _.. —_ stages.

AL Twit B, three ©. fowr O. five
Dunn sprinting we use —_ -

4. lowearm B. high arm i, high kriee 0. low knee
The lines marked on the track are called _.-~ ___.

A. lines B. lanes CG. rmcirks O, tracks
During the set position, you must rise the _ .__ Slightly higher than the
showlaers,

AL legs B. hands c. head Db. hip

How many members form a team in 4x 100 m relay mace?

A. Four B. Five Cc, 5x Go. Seven
which one is a long distance race?

4. 100m 4. 40m ©, 200m OG. 10000 m

Inoewhich race is Implement used in athtetics? -
Aa. &00rn B. 100m . Auredies O. relays

The winner in arace is the one whose _ _efrasses the finish fine first.

A. tors B, head c. hands D. lees

Which one is not par of the sprinting werniquea?r

&, Am action B, Leg action &. Body position D. JUrApING
“what is the name of the starting technique Used in long distance rinning?

A. Sprint ° B. Flying co. Crouch D. Sitting
“Inrare walking. the athletes must néver have both ___ off the ground.

4. elbows B. hands c. feet BR. knees
_Arpace run over different places like hills, grass and rivers [5 called

A. Turdles B. cross-country

i. eprint D. rniddie distance

an instrument used to measure the time taken during 4 race is called

4. slopwadich B, scale C. taps-mecsure DL ruler

with fingers aad Thm,
A. circle B. j-shoape c, wshope D. tehape

4, S4com Bf, 7am ©, 400m CO, 10cm

G


--- Page 107 ---
a

1é. Which ane is s int aq stige i In jumps?
AL AppHooA B. (rip © landing CG. Take of

i. Which ‘taplement i is sedi in discus?”

IS. hop. step and jump are stages of _ jump.

A. Pole vault B. lang i, high DL briple
13. On which port of the Body do you place the shot before you throw?

A. Chest B. Head C. Elbow CD. Neck
fu, inidvelin we use the 2.) rip.

A. forefinger B. beo hands C. ane finger 0D. palm
Answer the follewing questions.

The first tea stages of jumps are _ and

1.
2. The *yoe of vertical jump where a ‘ong metal cate is used it called the
a. ands gre Peto types of throws in athletics,
4. Which type of throw must be done inside a fenced ared to avaid accidents?
a. The two types of gnps in javelin ara ined
é. All throws should land ina Jared,
?. Name tre materials wsed te manufocture a baton.
6 Draw 3 javetirt and label the follo-ving parts
* Head
= Shalt
= Cord grim
?  Dunng sprinting, the feet mus? pus7 hard on the ground in tre .. action.
1, The two stages af ihe flying stan techrque are nid

Piectical dsessment -
Cemonsirate the following:

1}. The sporit stort.
2. The hurdiling using low obstacles.
4. The throwing technique in shat pur,


--- Page 108 ---
ge bout: awo-eness

demonstrate moving into space

aemonstrate cavering open space

discuss the advantages of moving info space
explain the disadvantages of moving inte soace.

Boe nD =

,

Invasion games are ployed by two apposing teams. One tearn lays ta win
tre space of the other jeam in otder to score. Examples of the mast Popular
Invasion Games in our schools are saccer, netball, nighy and handeall.

invasion offance defence so0ce

Invasion games lika soccer, netball. rugby ana handball are amongst the mast
popular games in the wend aver. Invasion is when one enters into another's temtory
by skill or force, In hese games the players aim to win the ball from the aoposing
jaom and score goals in the opposing tearn’s gad aed.

in the following invasion games you ore going to learn about

+ Attacking and defending skills used in the games
« Sofety requiraments

s Tyoe of equipment

» Pcsitioning of players

* Rules of the game:

©


--- Page 109 ---
at

* Advantages af moving into space
>» Dbodvonlages of moving info space

1. Name of game: Passing Foote!

Skills wsed In the game: passing. catching, shooting, dribbling, space aworeness

How to play fhe game:

Form tecns of ive members each

Use a space of 25m by 146m for "he gare

One member of the team & a goolkeeper

Play the game in the same woy a5 football

rhe game is played Indoars or OL tdoor at the playfield,

Equipment needed to ploy the game: bails, o bib for the three point player, shoes
with nib ber sales, shin quarcds.

Number of players: 5 foreach team

Rules:

1, There ore two periods of 10 minwtes each for the game

2. Only fhe goo! keeper rs dllowed 13 use hands and feet

2 You are not dllowed be score directly without passing to a teammate

4. A direct free kick can be owarded fa the opposing leam if a ployer kicks. trip

on oOppaneat,

Demonstrate fhe ‘passing football game! in your groups,

©


--- Page 110 ---
5 Name of game: squate hockey

Skills used in the game: dribbling. stick handling, space cwoOreness

How io play ihe game:

» ferm four teams of 5 mernbers
each

« Fach team stands on one side
of o 10 metre square

~ Fachmember cia team is given
a number

» pdorka 3d cm circle in the mice
at the foor

. Sloce 4 flat dises in the cinch

» wher a number is called ail
players wilh ihe number can fc
whe rraddie and dribhie a diss
eut of Ihe circle through the
spot where YOU Were standing

» Onve the disc in a clockwise ‘¥ > 7 i oe
direction around the square and back ta the starting point and te the circle

= The game continues until all the GrEMbers oi the team have thelr TLAITHS.

» The first player to reach she circle scores 4 pcints to the team the second player
scores 3 points

e The team which scores most paints is the wai er

Equipment needed ta ploy ihe gane- plastic cscs. heckey slicks, chalk board bar
recording. tape mecdsure for recording ihe distances

Number of players: 5 per team

Rules:

» tise the corectdrection when moving with the disc

» Foch team stands on one side of the 10m square

* Move any in the expected paih as you drive the disc.

- ¢ "sk

ine following ore some of the advantages o moving into space when playing

invasion games:

» Ployers will learn how and to move off the pall.

+ heips to recerve the ball.

+ ithelps players te contd the beat

» Movi inte space at ihe night fime allows players bo make decisions. Space is
an unaccuped postion.

. follows player to be gble to look around Them ored find ways of working with

the other players.


--- Page 111 ---
a

Uva ges aati cies om gaa

oo 4

Moving into space iso good skill for invasion games: however, it has the following
disadvantages:

« iidlows your apponenis ta know the nest movements you are planning to da,
* It can affect the way the team clays in the event of josing the ball.

« YoU can open space in Your own femery.

1]. Marne four skills Used inirerasian games.

2. Explain how fhe square hockey game is played,

4. ‘Give one advantage and disad. anlage of moving inte space.

4. A game called ‘passing football is played bys players aside.
5

. Whot are the rules of the ‘passing football’ game?

a

wT . _—e
Ey


--- Page 112 ---
far eh +g Pp altiGr Wiig

1. demonstrate proper positioning within boundaries
5. gemonstale proper pasilioning with team mates and opponents.

Inn most games itis impertant fo be in the rig aasition in order te coteh or pass
the ballta your teammate.

ty OW Ors

playing posihon goal crease touchdown

In garna skills players are expected to maintain their playing positions. These
determing the rales that players have in the gare. For example, some defend
weile others attack. The follawing Games fan halp you to practise and rainiain
ocsitiangs wher playing Invasion Qanves. ,

1. Nome of ihe aqme: Touchdown Ball
Names of positions: godlie. hwo defence players. Three Forwards .
Skiis used In the game: pcaitiening. sace qwarenets, passing, catching.

defending, attacking
How to play the game:

Sopdet) odin

» Ferre teams of six players.
1 The players take iheir potitians as shown In Figure LB.1-.
+ The godlies must be ina marked aed caliad a goal crease. 4 goal crease is a

fine thal shaws the goal orec.



--- Page 113 ---
Each teom wears its own colour cf bibs,

A player from the tec that wans tne toss gét the bal and stands on lhe centre
lire.

The team thot won fire toss starts Re game by posing to a teamr\|nate.

They continue pasang until they manage fo throw ta their godlie to score
2 fouchdown which is si point, 4 lovchdovwn is a si-paint score made by
carving oF passing the ballinta th? end zone of the opposing side.

The other team must defend so that fhe balle nat possed io the goche.

After a feam hes scored, the other keam restarts the ploy by a poss at the
cenire,

Equipment needed te play the game: o righy ball, bibs

Number of players: 4 players
Rurkes:

1.

2.

3.
2

Only the gootie & allowed inside.the goal crease ands the onty person qllawed
to score, Goofes occupy thea opoosite sides of thes tecms where they will
ecore by receiving Balls from their eons.

After an vnsuccesstul shat at goal. the qoolie will start the Gall by kicking to a
Taampnate.

Holding the ballfor mare than three seconds & not allawed,

Name of garnrse: Positions in Goaseball

Somes of positions In boseball: boiter, pitcher, catchers, short stop, aght held. lett
field and centre feted,

Batters hit the Ball using QO bat, the pitcher throws the ball te the batter, a catcher
cotches balk the batters Failte bat, and field player catch the ball after itis hit by
the beakber.

Players must keep their positions during the game. Each position is numbered as
shown in Figure 12.2,

iF)

Skills used In the game: Potting. throwing. fielding, catching canPAeh

How to play the games

The game is the same as baseball.

Boaters work together as c pair.

Pitcher (hrows the ball to The batter who hits the
bax] and decides fo nun to the first base or other
botes.

The second batter will ty to get the first bolter
home [the shading position,

RAelders uel catch flying balk before any of the Bees ta
botters reaches the Bose, then the batter is out. cars



--- Page 114 ---
Ne

» Wher a batter is cut, all players robate on position. For example, fron batker to
Hight feld follawing the numbers.
+ Ths allows all the players to play all positions.

Exvipment needed to play the game: iwa tals. ane softball, ane hame plate ard
three base plates, several gloves

Auber of players: 7-11 players

Ruste:
1. Rotate in the caxrect order.

1. How many ooinls are a ‘touchdown’ scare?

4S) Name the positians of players in baseball.

4. What are the roles of the batter and the pi cher in the caseball game?
4. Whet are the rules of the ‘Touchdown’ ball

4 Nome the equioment used ina game of baseball,

eer ee aes

Dernonstrate the ‘touchdown’ ball game.

th


--- Page 115 ---
a cates

raactean

Speed is needed when thrawng arc catching the Ballin most games.

There is need for quick reaction in ail invasion games $0 asta wing ball, move fast
enough to reach a bail o to defend oa ball, Reaction is (he ability io move fost
In order to receive or senda call. The following game con help te improve the
Gloyers' reaction skills:

1

Hame of game: Two geal toctbail

Skills used in fhe game: ottacking. defending. positioning, reaction, kicking and
dribbling
How to play the game:

Form two @qual tears and
hove one team weor bibs of
one colour

Use soccer field or bosketball
court

Each team has two goal
areds fo defend

Cnoose og gaolkeeper for
each goal area

Each team gets 4 ball and
mace it at the centre. On
the signal kick the ball into
Play

Try to score g bol al either O°
ne opoontion's gol aeqds



--- Page 116 ---
~

Equiprnent needed te play the game: a bali. c set of bibs per hear. comes or four
cartable Qodl,

Number of players: 6

Rules:

1, You may touch the ball using any part except your dams fram shoulders to
finger fips with exception of the goalkeeper.

2. Onby the goalkeeper is allowed to hancile i716 ball with their hands.

3, lta player touches the ball with hands or ars the other team gets a tee kick,

The follovang are some of the basic principles fer attacking in invasion games.

3. Beng able lo move inside and behind the defenders of the ather tec.

b. Being able to change the way you qtack so that the ather tearm will not knaw
the playing style you want 10 Use.

c. Making use of the width of the feild te spread out the defenders.

q, Being able to move in different ways fa score.

Deferding in invasion garmnes requires players te play as one fear and ovoid

making mistakes that car cost the whole team. The cpposing team should rat

ne allowed to score, The foligving are sone af tha ideas thal con be used in

defending: #

a. To delay by slowing dewn the game ‘hraugh oasing te each ather.

Prewide defence which does ng! allow ihe other team space to attack.

acing able 16 provide defence in al areas of the freld.

Ta concentrate and averd simple mistakes.

Be able te ploy as a seorn.

Design your own game which invalves attacking and defending using a ball. ”
Demenstrate tie game.

a rh oF

aaa Pees
oat EE
i

3

s

Reva tig 18 —

Mame three skills used in ta goat football,

Marne hwo principles of attacking in invasion games,
Name tee oinciples of defending in irvcsion garmes.

"

Ee Gd bo


--- Page 117 ---
Soy

» Invasion games involve attacking and detending,

* Space owareness is an important skill in invasion Garnes.

« Sevendl skills such o§ posing, shooting. dribbling, catching. defending and
olteackng are Used in invasion cares,

* Correct pasitioning of players is very impodant in oll invasion games.

* Some players can be positioned os defenders, others as atoackers and others
as torwards,

* The ability to react too situation is important in invasion games.

- Accurate reaction is needed when passing, snocting, dibbling and catching.

Pa

invasion — taking over the opponent's space in order te score
fouchdown -— ascore by drop pang the ball in the goal creqse

gool crease the marked areaina play fl|eld where 4 houchdown is made
space - open area not occupied by ployer

offence — the way of moving [he Gall in order to score

defence — protecting a boll from attack

positionigg — moving in space in order ta receive oF pass

batter — the ployer whe stikes the bol uang o bot in boseteall

mee ee es ——— -—_—- . ——_.-- — .-. =

7p Chesbce

Choose the comect answer.
l, is On example of on invasion game,

4. High jump B. Soccer i. Shot put DO. Reloy
2. The following ore invasion games excepl
A. rugby B, soccer ' OE cro country OF. netbaal
3. jnvasion games aim ta goals in ihe opposing team's Goal area
A. defend B. attack Co. remnave DO. score:
4. The ployer allowed to handle the soccer ball with hands is the In bao cecal
footkecalF.
A. midfeider B. Striker f. goalkeeper OD. defender
5. 4 foul in invasion games is when player | __.
A. falls down B. kicks of fis an opponent
C. violates the rules of [he game D. cdebrates a score
6. The following ore avarded as a penalty in soccer except .

A, red cord B. toss - free kick BD. throwin

‘>


--- Page 118 ---
In any race @ good finsh can make
the athiete win, The winner in aroce IS
a person whose trunk oF forse crosses ]
ee finish line first. The iorsa is Gat of ,
the numan body fram the shoulders
ta the hips eacluding arrrls and jes.

Every athiete snovid fight had
thravgnout the race fo Cross tre
anishing line first. The race is mot
cormalate wntil ihe finishing ine 1S
crossed, Te finish ihe race. you rst
cho the: following:

“ 1

» When you dre abou three sires from the line. pull your arms Back.
» Push your chest and shoulders forvaid as you Cros: trie hing

* *eep looking ahead

» De nat look around at the other athletes.

Name ihe thres siages af the saint saat

Running is made Up af. _ and _. distance activities,
The iimes marked on the wack are called - ,
During the sek.eosifion, you must raise Ihe ——__— slightly Kigher than ihe
shauldert. "

A. _ gp used to start a running event in athletics.

Durirg running. the feet mus! pusn hart an the ——_— of the feet with
powing acon.

7 All ronning events which require speed are calied

re

8 What is the name ol the position shown in the picture obove,
6 The winner ina race is fhe one whose —___ crosses the anus? line rst.
1G. Describe tw skills that make Up the sprinting technique.

@


--- Page 119 ---
7. Adefender’s roe is to ,

A, score a geal

B. coich the boll

C, poss the ball

G. prevent an opponent frorn scaring
4. inorder to start the game, o team needs io win Oo

A. creak B, met ©, score D. toss
8 In poseball a throws the beall ta the batter.

A. Bolter A. Pitcher ?. Godkeeper DB. Catcher
1D. inseecer if a player handies the ballwith heir hands iba _.

AL SGC B, award &, Foul b. win

Snug rec Ges Fane

Answer the following questions.

1, State any three advantages ot moving in space in INVasION Games, [2]
S. Define playing position. [']
4. State three playing positions in oasetalll, [2]
4. Why dre rules important an invaadon games? {21
5 Gwe aptinciple of attack in invasion Qonies. [J

1. Practice ihe “Touch dows” pall gcme in your OTours.

2 “i



--- Page 120 ---
1, aim stationary targets Fram within a 40m distance
2. 2M of average moving tanget for height with different shapes atter a short
ru. and jum.

In target games, players score when they successfully throw or strike an object.
Examples af target games aré got, carts, and archery.

‘ 7

’ Forres
a eet

target games pins bullseye helcinig

Target games cre games where players score when they successfully thre or
dike ar object closer to a target thon their apponerts were able to, The follawing
ore examples of tone! games that you can ploy to improve your abitity te aim at
targers:

tT. Name at game: Pin bowling

Skills used in the game: throwing, aimriig, targeting. stance
How to play the gome-:

® The bowler vill hold the ral with
ane hand and one lag behind
the other

= Ueirng fhe under orm throw rel
the ball on the floor to move
towards the pins oranged a3
shown in Figure 20.1. Ping cre
the target of o bowling gore.



--- Page 121 ---
~

» Each player has two chances to knock down as many ping as possible with
their bowing ball.
» ifyou knock down oil pins with your first ball you get ten paints.

Equipment needed to play the game: Beall, pts.

humber of players: individuals

Rules;
» 4 bowler hot bea turns te «tock dawn all tre fen puns.
© The bell should roll on the flaor not to be thrown te the Gls.

2) Name of game: Lars
Skills used in the game: throwing, airing, stance

How jo play the gome:

An nouncésr

Thrower

, Scorer or Rebate

. a
® Tale turns to threw arows called darts at a circular board,
* Tac ideo is te scare ‘torn 200 to O'n fewer throws than the other player.
* The gome is abavt accurate oir.
» Stand facing Ihe dart board which Is 2m overy.
* Kola the dart high above the shoulders as shown in Figure 20.2.
e Throw aiming ata number on the dart board or the centre of the board which

if colled tre bullseye.
NB At itis level you can make use of flat magnetic arows which are not shore.
Equipment needed ta play ihe game: darts, dart boars 4 mat anda shard.
Number of phayers: 2

Rules:
- Tocelculate the points subtract the points iow the three ihrows from the presert

tobel,

© Alwerys throw using one hand.


--- Page 122 ---
© Bach player is dligwecd three throws per chance,
4 The winner is the first playerwho reduces the scare fa vera.

3. Mame of game: Hit and run
Skills used inthe game: throwing. aiming, stance.

How Io ploy the game:

* Fortwo teams, one batting ond the other flelding. Fielding 6 lo catch or pick
up the bell after ithoas been hit in game such os cricket or basebail. and to
Ty to prevent the ather team fran sceonng,

» The fielding team must hove a pitcher, flelders, one lang base ployer and c

catcher,
» When the bother hits the ball Ine, must pun to the long base and return Aorme

if possible.
» A pointis awarded for reaching tis song bose and another ta the home base.
« (firs notsofe ta reture home a bose runner cnivst stay in the long base,
* Bunners ore allowed to be on the sarne base af the same time.

Equipment needed to piay the game: tennis boll. baseball/cricket bot. three mats
for o long Bose, pitcher's box and a home plate.

Number of players: 8 par faam

Rules:
= Arunneron the long base may rus only when the boll has been hit by a Gatter.

* The team thot scores more runs i: the winner.

©


--- Page 123 ---
Form teams of ive members each and demonstrate the pin owing Game.

—_— — —-— = _:

_gomes are games where PIyers Moore when they seccesstudly iro
orstike an objecr closer to a target.

an __ ore target games.

Ta skills used in target games are —and i _ .

Woot safety meqdures can do you need when playing das?

Kow many olayers farm a team 1a hit and run game?

_aqnd ___ —_are equipment wsed when playing carts.

Whatigthe rpame of the centre part ofa deat board?
Give one rule for ihe hit ane run game.

mah in ele hs


--- Page 124 ---
he mo: 7 * :
Cambat garmnes are games that are ployed by ployes who fight eack other ic
‘ind the winner, Combat gormes are fun and players rust play safety and fairy,

T

stancs crouch stance indo Rcircate

A stange ia baldhicing position in scarting activities. can alo be refered tc as
the posture. In soeorts the corect staiceé helps the body to balance, ta be qitle
te meve ond te reduce injures. Baing cware of a gaod stance is the fired step in
positioning tie body. A corect stance h requires in most ot the games suchas tug
obwoar ceckel, basketball, tennis, darts, archery and karate,

Tne following are examples of stances that differant players must take in orger to
perfor well in the qanes:

a. Crouch stance

The witket keeper hos bs
use [ne crouch skance in
order ka see oll the ooalls
coming and be ready te
catch them. The feet ore
Sheulder width apart. The
bocy weight i bolanced
an the falls of the feat in
oroer to move wilh soeed
te cobkch the Beall.



--- Page 125 ---
6b. Karate fighting stance

» end inthe fighting stance as in Figure 27,2 picture |.

© Slide the back foot fonvard and punch ta the chest level using the aght hand.
> Punch again with the leff hand without stepping forvard.

» Punch egain with the mgmt nan ta the stomach level.

ahecys maintain thie correct
stance as you aunch by bending
the knee of the front leg so that '
you will not see the front lec.

c. Serving stance In tennis
» Stond with teel shoulder

width a@pcrt. *

« The racked is held in frant of ~ e
the body with the wrist and i =— —. iP
the orm relaxed. 3ee Figure ‘ a; ,
213. , rr

- Kness should be slighty 2. |. ee
flaxed. mS “ae

i ee
a ke BE
Demanstate the comect stance For the wicke! Keeper.

“he following are examples of combat games where diferent slances can be
practised.

®


--- Page 126 ---
a

1. Nome of game: Teg of wor

Skills used in the game: pulling, gripping. balanaing, ceardination
How to play the game:

« Foon two teams of four players earch

+ (eamns pull oogosite each other by helding the rape

© The team that pulls the other tearm acrass the centre line on the ground, vans
thie eames.

Equipment needed ta play the game: strong rope
Humber of players: 4 Sloyers per tearn

Rules:

1. The repe used shovid be marked un the midele with a centre ling and 2 meorks

akaut 4m from the centre line,
3 At the shart of the pull the cenire ine should Ge above the centrelinég marked

en ihe ground,
3. Nobody's elbow shoukd qo above the knee.
2. Nameofgame: Juda

Jude is oné of the Japanese games involving fighting by grabbing and pulling
down the opponent.

Only oractise this stall in the presence of the teacher.

Skills used in the game: ouilling., grippitg. shance

©


--- Page 127 ---
How to play the gare:

E

Brand with the right leg in front ard grab your partner's nghi hand near the
shoulder.

4s you grab, turn your body $6 that your partner's weight isan your back,
Bend your knees and move the. badly formar,

Pull your partner over the shoulder so hot ae or she drops on the mat on tne
mack.

Keep on halding on your partner as he orsneé drops on the mat.

Always maintain fic staice os you perform the skill.

quipment needed-ta play the game gym ma |, Suitable jucko dress

Number of players: 2

Rules:

1.

Wear appropnate ottre.
Practise ihe skilk on a gym mat te avoid injures.

2.
3, Ge not use excess farce on your opponent.
4.

When an opponent signals that he ar she isin pain stop the activity.

Demenstrate the punching from the karate fighting stance.

|. Whalis astance?
9 Give bv padsans why Oo comect stance is imoetant in target and combat

CRCUTEES.


--- Page 128 ---
Mame ene combat gane.

What ore the important skills used in tug of war?

What is the name of (he Jaoparesa spor which icvalves grabbing and pulling
the apponen‘?

State two rules for safe practise of jude.

apo \

a

ee ie

2.

In target games the athity to aim is very important,

»* In combat games the ability to ure the correct stance heles in executing the
kill cowreciay.

* Sports ike jude and karate are very goacd combat games,

» Inoall striking games. canect gnp and stance helps the players ro air ata

oOrget,
. ;
stationary = -—  netimovwng
Jude - Japanese fighting spon which involves throwing opponent by
: grabbing
karate - Japanese fighting soort which involves punching, kicking and
blocking
pins - cone shaped ecuipment used in the sport of pin bowling
combat - compete in order te war
stonce - eaboloncing postion in sports like in karate
target - oon object that you dim at

Cheese Ihe comect answer.
l. Ina bowling game ihe targets are called

A. Bells B. pins Cc. dort D. club
2. you knock de wn all cing with your fist bowling ball you qet ——— saunts.
A, 2D B. 4 c. 10 Ce. G
3. In darts, tha dan Goeard &—  netres away,
AL 5 B. 2 C.F D, 10
4. Aiming ot the centre of the donbonrd is called a _—_____.
A, bulbeve A. bouchdawn 6, score D. gzal


--- Page 129 ---
~~

5 The ployer-who hits the ballin crickets called o _

4. pilcher B, fielcer bother O. catéeher
4. The fallawing is an example of 4 target game.

a. Tennis B. Soccer ©, Handball D. Solf
7, Sports equigment used in tennis 5 0 .

4. bat B. club =. dart O. rackel
&, Jodo isa Fgome.

A. firrbopweon B. Indian o. Japonese Oo. Amencan
¢. A tore’ game that involves 4 latis collec —

A. gpolt B, «arts <.. tennis OD, cricket
10. The following 6 a combat game except ——__. —-

A. juda B. karate Cc, terinis C. wrestling
1. Equigment used in golf are ere. Fal
2. Equipment used in bowding are ———. and ., — [2]
4 When you dir at the cenie cf the dartboard, itis caled a_—_—___. (1]
4. Which two equiaments ore Used in tennis? ral
5 State 3 ploying positicns of 4 fielding team in baseball. [3]


--- Page 130 ---
|. perform strokes tor height, spr, dstance and power
2. siike the ball or abject to a target over a speciied distance
3. sTike the Ball or object over a bamier not more than 1.5m in height.

=. *
*

Net games are activities in which puayers send an object towards a cour or
target area that an aoponent is defending, The aim is ta couse the object to
rand in the targad oreo while making it difficuit for the opponent ic return the
object, Met games include Volleyball, Tennis. $quash, and Wheelchair lerrus.

strokes

Most af the net games make vee of strakes. The sirokes are important movements
S ployer performs to hif a ball ying a racket. The strokes are usec in rhe following
net games lowr tennis, table tennis, aad squash. Exarnples of stroke are “archond,

backhand, volley. ced smash,

Strokes cra performed for different Gurposes and situations. Far example we hove
atrakes for:

f. Heh
2. Spin

3. Distance
4. Power


--- Page 131 ---
1. Stroke for helght

a}

The fob is. high stroke used aia cefence shart fo move the oopenent away from
tre net.

lo practise the lok:

Hold the racke!l comecth and stendin aready position.

Move into the potition quickly, - oF

Qoen the recket face to contact the pel! as shown in Figure 21.1 a).

Swing the racket Upwards te drive the ball over the apponent near the net as
shown in Figuré 21.1 b).and Figure 21,1}.

= Follow ihrough te give the ball directiar,

Po

2. Stroke for distance

al a) c] di

The serve is an example of a stroke far distance, It is used fo drive the cal a ing
distarce. T4 practise the stroke. follow the stages Below:
* Hold the racket using the corect gnp and ttand in the ready position as shown

Wi Figire 22.2 al.


--- Page 132 ---
Toss the ball up using your leit hand and swing ihe racket backwards.

Otve the racket to hit the ball above the head as shown in Agure 22.1 cl.

Hi? the bol ond follow through as shawn in Figure 22.1 d) to give the ball
Cire tae.

Shoke for spin q

ay b] “py d]

on

The spin stroke causes the ball to retate as it moves forward, itis ané of the mas!
aifficcult stroke foe the opponent to retum, To practise the spin. Follow ihe stages
below: *

Hold ihe racked using the cenect grip and standin ine ready positian as shown
in Fiqure 22.3 a}.

Push the rackel backwards above the leval of Ihe approaching Ecall_

Qpen the racket Face and swing the racket forward ta contact fhe bell os
shown in Figure 22.3 c).

The racket must continue ta follow the boll towards the target.

Shoke for power

co] dq)

The smashis an example of a power stroke which makes it difficult for the opponent
to return, To prachse the Power siroake:

©



--- Page 133 ---
» © * *# wo of

“NN

Hold the rackel corecth and standin areqdy position,

Frepore the racket forthe coming ball,

Mowe quickly.

Keep your head up and watch the bell.

strech your hand cs shown in Figure 22.4 c]"o hit he Ball and folie through.
Return to the ready pcsitian.

47 6xample oto net game that we can play is the ‘bathe ball’. To play the game,
follow the skeps given below.

Name of game, Battle ball
Skills used in the game: positioning. volleying. tossing, passing
How to play the game:

Form two @gual tednis.

Each team goes on one side of the net,

Each feam should hove three volleyballs cind the ather faqm with an extra
volloytral.

On the signal "oall” players vith a ball tess tae ball up and over ihe néise that
ofter eacn quater of twa minutes the team with fewer Golls on its side is the
WiNPSr.

Exchange sides and keep on oleying.

Equipment needed ta play the game: 7 volleyballs, a mer

Number of players: 4 per team
Rules:

1.
2. Only Use hands to play the game

3.

4. You are oh allowed to go fa ihe alher side of the net.

Poss the Ball over the nét by volleying it

Des held on to the Holl



--- Page 134 ---
+

Practise the strokes for distan nce and height.

—_— examples Of shokes usted 19 sennis,

. Explain how the stroke for heigh is done.

. Thesmash is anexampla ofa.) 2 -. stroke.

| The stroke which causes the cl to rotate is collec

. A high stroke used as a defence stroke to move the opponent cwiy from
the net is called the... WW.

& Agere ban example of a stroke for

oe er

woreoo

« Net games are games ployed woere o net divides the playing aren like tenris
and volleyball

« Different strokes ore uwedin net games that include forehand and backhand

- These strokes ore for height. distance, spin and power

strokes - ways of returning the callin tennis

lossing - thrawing the ball upwards

spinning - rotating af a ball ofter being slruck
opponent — the léorn or player you are playing against

Dernonchcale the following strokes:
1. Height

2. Spin

4. Oofonce

4. Power


--- Page 135 ---
explore ways of enhancing arip

exhibit correct grips for the skills in staking

demenstrale stances far stalls in striking game

demonstrate the orentation when sinking target acjects

distinguish between underhond and ferenand movement paiterrs.

in & fo ha

Sirking garres ore played using rackets, bets and balls. Eearmpies of the striking
games ore cricket. baseball and gofiball. There ore different types of grips in
striking qames.

qip . seam

Siriking games can be performed well if the grip skill is comectly mastered. A gip
‘away of holding striking equipment such as ackels and bats te hit shots during
ogame.

Gripping the boll in baseball

To practise the grip for maseball the following paints

haye ta be followed:

. Place index and middle Anger geross the wide
seams. Saami when you join two pieces of cloth or
laqther by sewing. 4» poseball has one Continous
seorn,

+ Hoi the pall on the inside adge of fhe thurs,

» Relox your hard.



--- Page 136 ---
a

Practise the skill by tossing the ball in the ar and catching it.
Gripping the ballin cricket

To proctse the basic grip tor cickel the
following steps can be followed:

* Flace the middlé and the index finger
qpart on the seam.

* The thumb should be on the seam under
the kal.

* Feloax your hen.

The Bat grip for boseball

To practise the grip for baseball follow the steps
ello:

= Place the hondle of the batin your bottom
heard

« Place the eng of the bat on the greund in
front of your frant foot,

* The index finger fram your botiom hand
should be bent around the bat,

+ Hold the bat in your Pngers Iryirg to keep
it out at the palm of your hand os much as
posible,

* Groh the Aandle in your finger using the
top hand,

* Keep the bot as lighr os possible.

The bot grip for cricket

To practise the basic orp for cricket the following

steps can be followed:

* Lie rhe bal face down on the qraund with the
handle pointing towards you.

* Pick the bat with both hands in the middle af the
handle.

* Hold your bat ihe way you woulo old the axe,

= 4¥-hope is formed by the thumb: and farefnger.

The batting stance

A cormect stance is needed an striking games. It helps players to balance when
striking [He bal using a4 boat er oracket.

o


--- Page 137 ---
ou Bog hd

ooo

Stan) with feet shoulder wicth apart facing sideways,
Flex the knees and ankles.

Sant shoulder should paint at pitcher.

The weight of the body should be on the balls ot feet.
Rotate your hips inwards to get ready ta hi the Ball
Hit the ball and finish with follow through.

add °

. Demenstrate the following:
. Gric for baseball boat

. Grip fer orcket ball

. Soathng stance tor baseball

ee root
. " . Oot ae aWaee 1

i’

ie

The bot speedvall be faster and the whole bony will be reloxzed.

The bat wil be in the right position to hit the pall.

Hands wil be abie to change position quickly eccerding ta the movement of
the ball.

It increases Chances of hitting the Ball.

a esa om op

Itrecuces ihe chances of hitting the ball.

Chances of missing the ball are high.

It can be dangerous because as you pwing if may go off the nand and hit
another player.

There are qames that can help you to improve fig. stance, underam thrav and
sifking. See the Rotating cricket game on page 133.

©


--- Page 138 ---
-

Name a game: Fotating cocket
Skills used in the game: dimming, striking. gripping. catching, throwing

How fo play fhe game:

= Plover should ba in fhe positions shown if Figure 23.4.

© Each player allowed lo throw ihe ball to the boller once.

+ After thrawing once. the players move from their positions once ina clackwise
direction,

» The batter does not hove to ton offer hitting the bell.

© of the bother hits the Boll this counts os one stare tolled o run.

= lithe batter hits a ball which drape in front of the other players he scores 2 ruins,
= ihe er she hits the Galt that falls behind thea other player he of she scores 4

PUFAS
= The botter can be dismissed if the batles Caught o the wickets are knocked hy

the eal.
Equipmeni needed to ploy the game: bot, balls

Number of players: 5

Rules:
1, Low boll below chest level shauld be thrown.



--- Page 139 ---
Ege He

— Name bao Skills used in striking games.

| Name two games where ihe orp is Wwaed

_ Feplain the baseball gnp.

“Which shape is farmed by the thumb and forefinger in the <rcket batting

ae

co md in

grip

orp?
Give two advantages of a proper bat grip,

_ Sive one disadvantage of a peer Grip.

State tne skills used ir. rotating crickel.
Faction the gating stance in cricket

Smriking games are played using rackets, bats and balls

Coreci grip of the ball and bat is importani in striking games

me corect stance helps the players to palance when sinking the ball peing a
oot ora rocket,

r.
b

the way of holding equipment

seam _ the middie part of a cricket ball where it is joined
undermeath —- below
felder ~ aplayer in games like cricket and baseball who catches the

bapmean

Meee,

In groups deme

ball
o player ina game like cricket wha balks the Eval.

1

Ce a Bat airs:

nétrate the rotating cricket game.

Show the follawang:

cricket ball one

« cricket bal grip

crickel Gat stance



--- Page 140 ---
ee
git.

demonstrate cycling techniques in different érvirenments
ctete the materials used in building a raft

constuct woter-realoted equiprmant

perform vanous woter basedeachvities,

Bwn

I re

There aré different activities which we can ao during our free time. We carn
travel ta different places such os game parks, lakes. museums and mountainous
arenas, These activities are called adventures,

In groups, moke o isl of game perks. lakes, museums and mouniding is areas in
YOU Province.

Cycists mounting dismaunting raat

Adventure games are in different forns, These include the excitement of exploring
new places, “When visiting new places you can do adventure games such as hiking
areychnig a frail, cressing o iver using a fart or canoeing or sailing,

oh
o

Cycling an adventure actvity of ricing a bicycle, Cycling § aba called hiking It is
the Use of bieyoles for transport, recreation and @xercee orspart. People involved
in cycling are called eyelists,

S


--- Page 141 ---
The bicycle is made wp of the Follower
pears:

pedal —used for cycling one are made
of rubber or metal

brakes — uted to reduce speed eine
stop the bicycle during oyeling

spokes — support the wheels

saddle - leaiher or plastic covered
seals

reflectors — help tha cyclist fa be seen
by otper mood users at might

handle bors - for controling the bicycle au ing syching
Alibicycles should have these ports becauie They are irnporkant for safety,

Equipment needed tar cycling
A bicycle is one of the machines wied in cycling, Protective equipment such os
helmet, gloves, shoos, jackets. snin or knee Pacs, gogales are needed for safety.

root.
=

heel met

jacket

reflective tag Exard

gloves

meen
- ote

The follawing ore safety req virarments When UsMy o bicycle,

. Weora fitting helmet every time you ade, This reduces head and brain Injuries
dung accidents.

* Wear gleves to protect your honds inthe event of an accident,

« Protect your eyes by wed ning goggles which do net break ecsily.

. Wear rejlective jackeb and trouser 30 that you can be ensily seen Dy other

road users.
» Weor reflective leg bands to keep tong trousers oway from the bicycle chain.

o


--- Page 142 ---
wa.

When you deorm to ride the brcycle far the first time you need sormecaie to assist BS
youn Balancing and cantrating, :

1. Mounting

Mounbing 5 the skill oF getting on tar
af the bicyels.

When mounting a bicycle had the
handlebars. Place one foot on the
pedal ang IR the other leg to place
the foot onro the other pedal. Sit
down on the saddle. Contral your
bicycle so that you will mat tell,

-.
b

2. Dismounting

Dismounting i¢ getting oft fram fhe
bicycle, To practise this skill you car
wgeg sfahienary bieycle. Stee down
first with the higher foot followed by
the tever foot Practise rameving the
reel without looking ot ihe pecdcs.

3. fenheal and bolancing

Sontreling ond balance involes
cychnig on the road or in aon open
oreo where Yo. ore oot likely to run
inta anything, Te practise cycling
Glong a straght path moke wse ot
empty plagic bottles to mark the
lone.

Practise the following activities:
« Cycle showly along o lane. Tou nééed support fom a friend if you canngt

balance. Look fonvord as you cycle, Your teat should remain on the pedda's
and rove only ing fomvord directon.

©


--- Page 143 ---
Key . _ ~

7. gyeling pata

3m ee : “

© plaste bots

————_——__— 30m —_——_——

» Place empty plastic bottles Jr dpan on each side af.a thirty metre line. Cycle
mand out cl the line afempty bottles. As you cycle both frant and rear wheels
must not knack the botlles,

4, Braking during cycling

Jo brake safely during cycling, keep the weight of your body forboack inthe saddle.
apply bath brakes slowly at the sarng time uni the bicycle stops.

§. Checking rofiic

whenyouride adlang argaditisimparta nt
te check tratfic before taking any action
like signalling ta tyr. To eractise this
activity cycle along a straight line and
on signal fram 2 partner look borack over
Ine right shoulder. Tell your partrer haw
many fingers he is halding up.

To fun or stop always yee hand signals te
show the other road users Your intenticts
ay shown in Figure 24.6-

Signalling is very important because it alerts olher rood users ef whot you want to
do and allow then tine te peat in the comect way.

em.

. You must obey all the road rules and ratfic regulations

» Keep to the left side of the rood er ue a cycle track

» Avoid cycling aft night bul if you must dio so wea rellective clothing and use
Wghis and rele ctors on yOu micycle

+ Walch for wet leaves, pothates. stones and broken glass on the road

» Be sure your brakes aré working very well,

Poces can be joined to form knets, The knots are Used as joints in tent nite hing,
in mountain cimbing and in buiaing rafts. There are different tyoes of knots that

©



--- Page 144 ---
a

con ne wsed ier different purposes. Zxaroples of knots ore the overhand square
knot, sheet band and the bask. bh:

The steps that can be followed in fenrning of an overhand knot are shown in the
following pictures:

Overhand knot

When a rope end is posed throug the foop it
Forms ihe overhand kaet. Pullibe end encugh to
make iF tight.

The square knot

The square kneti used for tying tea thin ropes of
the same 26 together, This type af kyot is used in
first did when fying bandages.

Put iné two rope ends together, deft over night.
Twist the left hand rope over the righ! hand rope.
See Figure 24.8 bb.

Bing the rope ends up dnd these sheuld be even

with each other. lace the end in your right hand

over the other and twist it behind Fhraugh the
bight.

Hole bath ends ith fingers and thucabs orc pull
ends out to foo oknot, $ee6 Figure 24.8 c] bicgtesme dhe! "tose go up
Sheet bend

Ihe sheet beng is mosty Used when | 2ining ropes
of different thicknesies. IF can aso vor well for
rapes of equal thicknesses

Farm a 8ight on the end of the thicker rope and
hed it tightly in the lett hand, Mow cass the end of
the thinner rope from below up through the bight.

Bring the end of the thinrer rope over, arcunc,
and under the bight, then vip it under its dwn
standing port where this enters he bight.

Both rope @nds are now on the same side.

Hold the bight with one end anid tig hten the sheet
end oy pulling in the other rope's stending port, fegaa we lea ee


--- Page 145 ---
1. Demonstrete mounting a bicycle.
4. Demonstrate dismounting a bicycle.

foe Fd

— Three examples af adventure ac livities.

—Whakis the other name for cycling?

Drow the bicycle and label the fallowing pearls:

- Pedal

+ Saddle

« Handle bars

4. Nome three equipment the cyclist needs far saiety ond state ihe sately
previned by each af the cyeling safety equipment,

§. Cive 2 road rules a cyclist musi follow.

6 Name twa types af knots weed for tying.

el

Lashing if binding er tying woodea poles or tmoere with a rome. Tne process of
lashing can take ihe following steps

Step |:

e Turd the rope araund Ihe vertical pole
nvice and He s& that one énc of the
rope is venger.

+ The longer end i5 wropped over fhe
crossing poke and on the botarn oF ths
yerticd! pole and back,

Step 2:

» Pui the rope so that it Passes OM the
sack af the verlica’ pole ond over the
crassing pole and repect,

Step 3:

« Continue wrapping he rope aru nd ihe
poles until you have three wr ppIngs 25

shown in Figure 24.10].



--- Page 146 ---
step 4:

' FPrepore to moake o te

step oO:

= Short your first tying stage
Torn The rope around the fra poles a5 shown
in Figure #4,10 6].

Step &

a Complete three or four wrappings and
complete with tying tighth. «

A fof s*woter radspod thot con be used for water sport activities. It can be
constructed yang different floating materials,

Material which can be uted 16 make a rol are:
* wooden pole or bamboo

* romes and strings

* mails

5 empty 20 litre plastic buckets

-oy TG construct o rosfe

We con canghruch ourraft at ached or ata camping place vsing cheap availanle
materia. fa constuct aroft you nese the following:

= Four straight tong poles 2-3 m larig

© Three short poles t-2 rr

* Thick ropes and sting


--- Page 147 ---
* 9 five litte plaslic Cantainers
« Pair of scissors

» fails cna a hammer

» Two wooden boards

Stage 1: Building the frame

* Loy the end of the sacrter paige Gver the
edge of the larger poles at right angles.
«Lash them together using the rape as shown
in Figure 24.12 a] te forma rectangle.
a}

Stoge 2: Frame for the deck

+ lLashiwo middle long poles over the shorter
poles ss shown in Figure 24.12 bh}.

> Yeu should term o regiangle made up of
four lang poles crosied by three shorter
anes kad ontop ot them.

stage &: fying the containers one fhe frearnié o

. make sure that you usé paste container:

-hat are tightly sealed ta avo entry Oo
water. This anabies it te foc! well.

* Tie the nine empty containers an the long
antes as shown in Fiquie 24.12 Cc) using
reopies. Make sure thot the conigines Ore

tec ficenly.
cz

Stage 4: Mailing boards ta ihe deck
- Nail ha boards to the frame using the cil:

and hammer an the long poles
« This forms a deck where people can sf
during rafting. See Figure 24.12 qd),
Test the raft by placing it in shallow wedler in
order ta find out its ability to float, More plastic ai

containers can be added io improve ihe
flocting of the raft.

1
Boe i tes ee

We can move the raft in water using paddles, The paddies are wed to push tre
walter which drives the raft forward,



--- Page 148 ---
Whot's lashing?
Ais water transport dhat can be used for water sorts.

_ Nome hero mdltanals which can be wed lo make o raft.
Whot name do we give to equipmeat used te drive a rah era canae?
What is the shape of the frame used far building a rari?

::


--- Page 149 ---
eRe ee oe Up ERT
. we LS as ee AA 2s

1. perform various weter based activities

+ demonstrate techniques of climbing and abselling
%. demonstrate the belaying technique

4. use given clue to find places and okyec ts.

~ Se ag
ee ee

We can consiuct roils fer use in performing water activities using locally
available materials like poles and ropes.

Koy words

cancaind sails oabseiling belaying orenteening COUnEe |

ee ES TT
.

‘ih

Tela:

Canoeing is an achyity which involves
roving a cance using paddles. It is weed
as a part or adverdure activity.

The paddier who is the canoe aniver
sits facing the direction of travel wher
ravalling short distances. The paddles
ore Used to push woter backwards. The
Tiovernent ef the woter back allows the
eqnoe 1 move forward as shown in Figure
2.1.

tiga walersport that uses wind to push the
sails in order to move the boat. Sails ore
made of pieces af clath which are pushed
by wind to drive the Boat. The boat does
ne have an engine and is moved by the
wird.



--- Page 150 ---
Sailing cruising is an activity done for recreation an holidays or weese ids. The
bool centrolled by pulling tre rope ottached to the sails, This helps +c drive the
hoatinte the inlendéd creactian.

.
SPR ire tk eae ot : SER
. - FPA . la kde Bae. nay a ales

Reck climbing is cn actyity in which
peoole chmd vp, dow or across rocks
arrock walle. The plans io reach the top
part on the rocks.

Fock climbing réqurés scéecial type of
eguinmect, The equipmen* provicles
sotety ond énables Ihe ascending cad
descending easier, Climbing can be
dane on different rock surfaces as shown
In Figure 25.3, om.

E

Abseding is an activity of descerdiqg pisunecs . teen. Hem
goroack surface or other near vertical ,
since wsing a daubied rope eoisd
around fhe bady and fixed at a higher
point, for example, Ono rack.

When abseiling the climbers mustuse tte
orp of their boots to contral the descenr
down o fect rope. The rope must be frst
tied on a neck. The rope mutt be rolled
oround the climbers body as he er she
lat: Fire or herself day.

safety equipment used ir

fock climbing

The feo most important climbing abd
gbhseling equipement are fae strong

boots and rates, The boots hove nil:
that enable the climber ta gip as he or

she chribs or abseils.

climbing boots

Aimbing ropes Feet yet


--- Page 151 ---
Beloying § an important rock clirnibirig skal. It
enables satety in climbing. Belaying is The process
af halding the climbing rope anda climber in the
event ef o tall with the rope threaded through a
belaying device. The rope jcins both the climber
and the beloyer for sakety.

Climbing involves experienced and leaning
climbers, An example could be one in which
there are three climbers the lander. second and
ihe toll, the lender who is more axpenenced
climbs first. when the leader has chmbed abet
16 metres he ar she slops and support his teat
firiy on @ rock, He or she belays the rope by
ting itbonig a rack, The second climbs up to the
seacerd and also béeloys. The leacer wew cimios
further ond belays as shown in Figure 25.6 B]. The
tail véhe is the third climber climbs to the second
cimeer and beloys. The climbers wih continue
‘i that order until they reach thé top of the
mourtain,

4

Oierteerng is any interesting adventure sport
which provides chances fe lear. It can involve
orice following marked points on a Mop whee
you will have #6 find these check paints on fre
ground, The person who finds all the check
points in {he right order in the shortest fine is the
winner. Check points are marked using white
and erange flags and they are offen mdden
away making them fun to ined.

Crianteeing helps us to learn mcip avimals, Use
of a compass and estimate distances between
giaces with Gocuracy, The mest importartt
equipment for chenteering Go map. There
need fer us to learn how 10 read maps.

For orienteering the orienteers need to have ‘he

‘ollawing equipment:

» Comfortable shoes for walking
» Comicrable clothing



--- Page 152 ---
= Bottle crirniks
* Moyes
= Compass

Map reading

Mop reading helps us dunding arieHeercng. Ibis important te be able to read a mea,
Toredd ao map prachse reading the mop of your school by dong the fallowing:
Turn dhe map unfil what is in frontof you on the graund is in front of you on the
man. For example, if you ore facing west the west side o* the map icuid be
away fram you,

* Walk around the scheel reading the map and pomng out and naming
features Cs YOL qa,

* Proctisé keéprng the map in the carect direction os you walk.

* Fold the map inte a small easily held Piece and hold your thumb on the map
ner where you are. This makes it easier to reher back fo the map when vou
toke your eyes Offi. to

The following picture shows how fo hold a
mde Gunn orienteering.

Te grace mop regding use the sting course
In the following activily,

During oienteeing we either watk cr ryn
following morked course on the around. A
course is a marked area made up of ¢c ontrals
with hidden flags. ne of the counes usedin
orenie@ering is the string course,

Sting course fqL.a te Bes
The string course ts a short orienteering 2ourne ;

which ig marked by centinuaus ribbon ar if 7 Fence
rope. The mop below shows an axamrcle ofa “®

sting couse orienteering map. Bunilding
From the start the continuous ribbon called Beouldar
the string leads yoy along the courne. When Big tree
you reach the place creled on the map Trai
coled control you will find the flags. 4? each

contral you will find stickers far marking the Starl
comect box on the map. Follow the wourse

finding diferent canton until you reach the Central
fnish which fs usually the sare point a5 the Finish

steirt,

‘>


--- Page 153 ---
1, Brow ihe mop of your school and provide o key showing the features an the .
mice.
2. Calour the fectures or different places on Ihe map using correct colours.

ao ant Y
arg = rl ]

Canoeing is ar activity which involves meving a cance using
Woot 1s pountainesringt

Name two safety equipment Used in mou ntainee ing,

_—. _.is par of The beat whichis pushes by wind forthe boat to move.
Explain twe cditievent ways of rock climbing.

Whealis abseilirg?

The mast important equiprent fer climbing and obsehing are

r

“RnB GN

- OMG

@ Arock climbing skil which enaples scfety during climbing is .
$ Three cimbers climbing arock can be the ——__, —.-—\_ and
1G. Orienteering rele vs ta ~onda.

_- sees ook ee - me 4 —— —.- —- meee

-  4édverniure games are done ducing free time and can involve cycling, mountain
climbing. canoeing, rafting, ard sailing,

» Cyeling con be done clong different tyees of fronds and rogd mules mus! be
rlkowad

+ Cyeling fecnnigues such as mau nting and dismounting rnust be practied
before one becames 4 good cyclist.

* Rotts can be used as a means of transport during Comping.

» We can ELild aur own rafts at school using different Enots such as lashings.

» Lasnings help the joints to be sang.

+ Canoeing, sailing. climbing and abseiling mount ing are some of the acdvenlure
octvities.

* Dunng cdventure the use of satety 64 Viprment and following safety miles is vieTy
imaartant,

+ Oriemeering § an activity which teaches us how la explore different places
witht Gering isl.

koa
viegio¥

descending — going downwards
movntaineering — the sport of climbing cr eunbains



--- Page 154 ---
orenteering

mount
SHIT
dismount
biking
camper
signalling

fashirigs
raft

canoeing
Sailing
Sails

abseding

belaying

“activity where maps and compass are used fo get fo a

place

climbing en top of ahose ora bicycle

foot rest used by horse ricters

going dew a horse ord bicycle

eycling

a person whe camps especially in a tent or caravan
indicabng te ondther eran vain signs when diving or
cycling

oway ot ting weoeden poles with a rope

water transcart built using wooden poles

a sperting activify thak involves moving a cangae using
Paddles

ag woter soert feat Uses wind to push the soils in arder to
move the boot.

pieces of sfrang clath which are pushed by wind to dave the
boca .

the descending or going down a rack sutacte or other
Yel sutaces using a doubled rape coiled araund the
body and fixed at a higher point

the skill weed in climbing ropes

Choose the carect answer.
). People who cycle gre ccilled

4. bicycles B. cycists Cf. cycle D. bikes
2, The pan of a bicycle used tereduce speed and step the bicycle dunng cycling
f colled
4. pedal AB. reflector C. saddle Cr brakes
a. Equipment that helps protect the head when cyeling is called
A, Gloves B. goggles ©. Felmet D. reflecters
4. The skillo? getting off a bicyche is called,
4. oyoling 8. mounting ©. idirig 0. dismaunting
5. In oycling the skill of letting other rood user know what you vant to de is
called ___
A, signalling B. weaving ©. cycling G. informing

4. The sheel bend is mostly used when joining ropes of different or equal wu...

A, lengths

B. thickmesé CC. calour Cy sizes

7. The following is equigment Used in canoeing,

4. Bicycle ond helmet
C. Coane and paddles

B. Climbing shoes and rape
CG. MCI and compass

‘2


--- Page 155 ---
&. In rock clirnbing. the most experienced climber wha

4A. tail B. mickdle © leoder
¢ ever mop should have 3. __.

A, shcker B. key ©. contrel
10.4 compass is a device used fo find

A, a checkpoint B. director Cloamap

Answer the following questions.

| ‘Whal is the skill of getting anto he Bicycle?

Getting off the cycle is called | .

Whiatis the technique in the iclewing pic ure called?

Lae

4. 3tme 4 equioment required im.orenleenng. ;

ie

0. climber
D, check point

DG. a sche

[1]
[7]
[1]

[4
Ul

5 The aame af arock climbing skill which enables safety during climbing

é. Give caiiy tao sofety equipment required for water sports or acnihes, {2}



--- Page 156 ---
I. demarnstrate ability to link movement themes with improved level of skill and

vanety
2. Cemonstrate balances on ana pant, hwo points Qnd three paints.

There oe several actwities that can te done in gymnastics, such as climbing.
reading, singing, jumping anid balancing.

focomoton spother Rieke = Pyramid symmetical

asymmetical  gyoineastics routine
Gymnastics activilies promote health and fitness, It alse improves our knowledge
of body movement and how body parts may be used in various physical activities
such as games, mass deploys, omd aquatic skill. Gymnastics activities can oF
done on equipment such os mat, benches, ropes, bars, and boxes. Various
dactiedies which can be dene on these appardicus inchideé Balancing. hriing,
tuming. climbing and rating,

One of the most important activities in gymnastics is locamotion. Locomotion
means travelling from one postion to another using body parts in different ways,
Examples oFfocometion aré skipping, rolling. hoping and crowding, In locernatien,
equipment such as ropes. hula hooes. and comes are used.

Wier doing ayminastics health and sarery 6 very important.
= Many achvities require thick mok. The mots should be piaced where

(


--- Page 157 ---
lacomation, dismouriling from a piece of equiprnent and where the sufoce
or flor is stooery and hard,

* The mets shoulo be cleaned on aregular basis,

« Check allarge apparatus to be sure itis safe for use.

* Children are not olewed to adjust or change the position of fhe equipment
without the teacher's instucton,

* Equipment must oe placed carefully ond nar too close together and close to
walls,

« Chalk dust may ce Used on the palms of she hand to prevent dipping when
aipping tie apparatus.

> Follow aymnashics rules and regulatiens al te time.

» Donatwear cicthes tog loose or tan tight os they will affect movernent.

¢ Gymnastics siopaers or oore feet must be wsed in gyrnnastics activities.

» Sockets shoud be empty and jewellery rernoved o¢fore activines.

e Start all activities with GQ warn Up ana enc wilt a cool down,

> AGUEporting penan called a spotter is cocded to assist in most activites irl
qyminastics.

Safety Falls are activities that can be practised and which help the gymnast io Fell
wilh Gontral. This helps ta prevehhipjunies i gyri tics,

1. Judo roll

* Therolis ase called the shoulder reall.
» Thisused as g safety rollin gymnastics to prevent injuries.

Ta do tree jc reall:

* Souder? down wth your feet wide apart and one foot forvard.

» Place ane om fonvord and tuck your head ta your chest.

@ Tomihe fead in the direction of the hand and roll foravard.

- Keep the chin on your chest and land on the back of your shoulder,
» Prishin the standing position with one foot behind the oiher.

©


--- Page 158 ---
27. Break-falk

¢ Squatwith the back 1o the matard fall back with your Bock flat.
* As you fall move your arms sidewc ys to bre the fall.

rise
Tope

1. Backward roll to o headstand

aH Ir

= Squatand pul your hands behine your héad in backward roll postion. with
the back facing the opposite side of the moat,

* Roll backward stretching the crunk ond legs uperards,

= Support your body on head and hands.

2. Forward Belly roll

Sores cao pele

« Stand feet shauvider width agad ard fall haresared.
* arch your body to roll over your kn@es, Iemimy and chest to a headstand.
* Bolance fer some secands and then do a forward roll.


--- Page 159 ---
3, Moving up and down the wall

® $quaton hands and toes wath feet against the wall cond head up.

e PuTyou weight an hands,

» Walk the feet up the wall and hands closer to the wall to the handstand
position

+ ‘Walk down,

4. Hondstand te a forward rall

b

fe ee

« <jok your legs upinia a hardstand.
+ Balance forsome sesords and lower Your elbows.
* Tuck your head under and roll forward to astanding pasition.

5. Climbing the inclined bench

+ Support one erd af a hench with another bench or hook it onto a climrung
imddes,
* Walk tp-toe forward, squat. pring and iaad on the mat.



--- Page 160 ---
ammo Feeomoureeo wc

é. Ball bolance

ei

= Squat ona bench facing @ach. other.

* foise ons sideways.

* Haid the Dall head to head or chest ta chest.
© Move Up add down along tie bench.

7. Forward fo backward rol

= Squat
= Forward raliiand finish inte a squat position
© Backword roll io finish ino squat position

é
a


--- Page 161 ---
Proctisé and demonstrate the following ce fivittes:
1. Juda ral
4. Handstand to a forward roll

0

Answer all the Questions.

1. Gymnastics achvities promote end.

2 Name three locamolion activites.

2 Gre four health and safely gymnastic rules.

4. During a fonwvord belly call you have to stand feat apart and Fall Forword.
5. Name te equipment used in a ball balance activity.

&. Forward roll with run

Take a shor run te fre mat.
Pertorr a fenvard rollinto standing pasion.

7. Back to back roll

Stand buck ta beck with your
porter.

Grab each ofber's ands with
elbows to the trent,

one panner leans forward legs
astide Bull the other partner over
‘he hias ond back.

The other partner calls bockward
cver on tie back and land oi
feet on the mat.



--- Page 162 ---
a

*

Continue holding te held on your Sartner' hands throughout the activity.
Continue rolling over the back frorn one place te another.

10. Forward walk-over

+ a LJ

11.

Shand facing the gymnastics mftats '

Kick up inlo a handstand with the legs split one forward ang the ether Back,
Legs are lowered with the forward leg leading.

Stand on one leg with hands Up,

4bvays keed toes ana fingers pointed.

t -

The carnwheel

.ostrraer

Stand sideways te the mat, feet octrice

Lett side should face the mat

Raise left hand and night hand ovt to the side

Bend the body te the tefl side to ut the left hand and then right hand in line
Om noct

At jhe same time push the right leg up followed by the left jeg

Legs should bs straaght and apart

Keep arrns straight and head reise throughout Ihe activity

Lond en the met



--- Page 163 ---
12. Headspring off the stacked mots

3]

squat and ¢wing tre hanes forward to pul them shoulder width apart cn Me
aacked mit

The head should be in front ofthe hands an the mat

Soring off goth hands inte a heSdstand pesition

Seen legs straight ond plke

Rol forvard ond push the legs forward and downward

arch the back cand push off the rat with Pards

Lane on the rat in the squat positizn and stand

13. Headspring over a rolled mat

woo at

Stand anc put your hands on the rolled mat

Swing your body and legs up keeping ans siraight into a handstand postion.
Are the back aad push using Ponds os you swing over The rollad mat into a
standing position.

Keep tie head mack throughout the hancspring.



--- Page 164 ---
=

14, The upswing

« Eneel on Ihe mot and look cheact
* Swing both ams backwards then fonverd and Upward.
¢ At the sare time push with force using feet ta bring the body into a crouch

positon on the eet. '

15. The Jack-knife jump

Shand feet slightly apart

Bend the Kies

Rose orm backward

Jump and swirlg arns forward and ve word

Lift your legs and keep thern straight and wide astride inthe air
Touch your toes with fingertips while in the air

Bring the feet toa the hands nat the hands ta the feet

Bens your knees a5 you land.

- 4 * 4 LJ * 7 7

ra

Pyramids are balances which are dane by two or more peoole, DBitferent hoes
of eglances dnd bedy shapes are formed. During pyramid formation, stronger
players must be wsed os supperters or bases of the pyramids. Shapes formec:

2


--- Page 165 ---
qre described as symmeifncal of asymmetrical Symmetrical
ich are the same on bath sides “hen divided into bed
foam shapes which are not he same when divided

during balances
balances form shapes 4?
parts. Asymmetrical balances
Inhe tere parts.

1. Balance on thigh

' 7
4

«Farm groups of thres with members of equal size.
* Buicda pyramid with one gymnast balancing on the thighs of Ihe other twit os

shown in Figure 26,14,

2 W-eglonice

* |p graups of four, build a pyramid which forms the Weshape.
e The strongest gymnast must ferm the base of the pyrannd,

o



--- Page 166 ---
1,

* + : 7

vee teete|

Moving supported handsiond

7 oto.

Farm. groucs of four ployer: of eq... size.

Build supperted hanastend pyrarigd ag shown in Figure 24.20,
Strang players should form the baie of the group bolance.
MOVE OS Oo pyramid from cne paoirt to anotner.

Walking chalr

oval

In groups of five gymndash ol oaua. size,

Build a pyramid as shown in Figure 24.21.

stronger players should be Used Oo: meses or supports.
Hold the pyramidal far five seconds.

Try ta move @beul 2 min that posiion.


--- Page 167 ---
rot

A gymnasilc routing i a combination of gymnastics activities which are done
foligwing a pattem fram one station te the lus: station.

=
Proacts® and demonstrate the following gymnastics routine:

Station 7! Head spring off stacked mats

Shalion 3: Jack-krile



--- Page 168 ---
Station 4: Mare spring Qver a mal

Besign a gymnastics pattem made up of thrae movement skills, rolling, skipping.
turning and boaluncing skills. Practise and demonstrate your oattern.

>


--- Page 169 ---
er

Tre body position where the legs are kep* srawght and toes pointed is called

Ina hand spring we use — ko spring
Which ski! ig needed ie. forming pyramids?
Baiances which fom shapes which are equal on both sides when vided
inte twa ports ore | balances.

totances which forn shapes which are different on both sides when divided
inte tee parts are caled clams.

A cambinaten of activities which forma caitemnin gym nastics is colled

Gymnastics actrvitias promote healih ondfiteessand imerove body movement.
Health and safety is important when doing gymnastics 1o o¥eid inpunes and
epraad af diseases.

Ditfarent locemoation octivities whith car ise done in gymrmastics ore: sofety
fails, forward belly toll and back bo back ral. .

jl he skills we leam in gymnastics must help us in pyrarnid Building.

In building pyramids symmetrical and asymmetrical shapes are formed.

Afar learning various gymnastic tkil we should be able to form your own
Qymnashes routines and demonsirate the skills.

t

locomotion — moving from one place to cnother using diferent ways
shoulder wkith apart — standing with feet forming a distance the same as that

of the shoulders

apringing — pushing off from ihe grovnd
fear leg — the back leg
pike — da positionin which knees ore straight and o tight band

at the hips while balancing ona bar

pyramid ~ a shape formed by gymnasts by Balancing by

supporting each other

syrmmentlccl — a shape fomedin eymnastics which divices the bacdy

Inte aqueal pHarts

asymmetric al — gshape formedingy mnastics which connot be divided

into equel parts

gymnastics routine = — gymnastics pattern lollawed by a gymna shas he oF she

perfarms



--- Page 170 ---
Chase the correct onswer,
I.

2.

co

Passing tooiball is dn example of Gomes.

A. Invasiar B, target C. striking CD. cornbat
One advantage of moving into scace fs that

A. it aliows players ta make cerc-sians

B. it allows opponents to knaw tre next movement you polon

GC. affects the woy the team plavs

CG. itwilnotallow you to poss

One of the seillé not vse in invesian games t5

4. bathng B. posing , throwing D. attacking
How many points are scored ma touchdown?

_F 8. 8 C.F D. 4
ine position for baseball players is ;
A fielder B.* dipcilic f. keeper Do forwercd
The {hrews the baseball ta the batter.
A. forward B. goatic f fielder DB. cicher
A § the name of equiogment Wed in baseball ond cricker,
AL racket E. hat C. plote CG. wirket

In gomgs. players score when they successtuily throw or strike an object
closer ta a target.

AL invasion B. target Cc. combat D. karate
and ere examples of target games,
4. Darts and pin bowling B. Darts and baseball
C. Soccer anid pin bowling Cr. §accer ond tennis
. 4 bulséaye & oO commen werd in. oo.
A. baseball 8. darts ¢, pinbowlng OD. soccer
The Japanese game which invcives grabbing and puiling the opponent is
collec .
4, karaie B. carts i. jJdo D. tug of war
_ 68d boaioncing position in sports,
4, Stance B. Pike . Tackle GO. Kicking
Which ones nota cernbol gamne?
AL Juda B. Wresiling Cc. Karate CD. Soc cer
neato stroke im bears.
4. Forehand B. Volery ©. Front crawl LD, Backhand

The streke which causes the boll te rotate is called _

A. lob B. Sere ©. spin D. smash

This grip is usedin

4A oncket B. bhoasehall CG. tennis  D. pin Bowling


--- Page 171 ---
Lf

24.

Za.

ze.

af.

28

In gymnastics this activity is called

ee.

Which shape is formed by the thumb and j srefinger in the cricket batting grip?

A, W-shope B. V-shape c_ Y-ahoame D. T-shacve

oWhich one is notan advactage of a proper bat gne?

4. Botspeed will be taster
B. Batowill ce in the right cosiliae ta hit the ball
, ltis Giffiquit te hit the oall
D. Being able to change positicn quickly
is notan example of adventure aciiihes.

4. Cycling a. Camong

Cc, Mountain clirnbirng Db. Woliey ball

eg neat a part of o bicycle,

A. Harness B. Saddle C, Pedal DO. Brakes
Which one is nat an example of road rles a cyclist must Follow?

4, Alwoys keep left B. Avoid cycling at night

Playing on the road OG, Obey all the read rules
Equipment used ta drive a raff ord cane 5 colled ;

A, pedal B. wheels mi, pleks DC, padeles

is an activty of descending a verical rock surface using a doubled
rere.
A. Beloyirg B. Canoeing ©. Sailmg CO, Abseding

three people are chmnbirg a rock surface. the last climber can be refered te
as the _ ' .

A COPS B. second Cc. head CD. tal
is the ski needed in ferming pyrarnicds,
&, ABs lng A, Balancing @ Beloying Db. Sailing
ealances which form shapes which ore the same on bath sides when divided
into two parts fe balances.
A. syrometry B. asyromeby C. running 0. laceration
which type of attire can be used during cn Mn aslics?
4, $cheol shoes 8. Gymnastics slippers
* Gurr shes b. Loose clathes
* combination af activities which form a oatiern in gymnastics is colled a__._..
A. gymnastics routine B. gymnadics balance
©. dancing GD. locametion

_4 person who supports another person incvrinastics is called a __
4, camper BA, belayer spotter 0, oyclist

A. JDEWirig B. pike : C, readspring: D. cores.



--- Page 172 ---
a

Answer the follawing questlons.

1, The sell of getting ante the bicycle is ; (1|
2 Gelfingolhihe bicycle iscaled_ [1]
3. Canaeing ts [1]
4. Two satety equipment used in mountaineering are and _-- ‘P|
5. Tae most imporiant equiament far climbing and abseiling ore and
12

4, Onenteering helps usta. dane (2
7.) Bolances which form sqopes which ore different on both sides when divided
inte hwo Part are called boalonces. (|

8. Reachen is [1]
@ The centre part at a darl board is called . C1]
10.0ne disadvantage of moving ints space is that rt akows to know the

next movement. m ; dj
1t. The smash if cin example of q strake. ill

12.4 high stroke wed as a Getence stroke fo move the opponent away frorn the
netis called the ; : a

iy pom

Demonstrate the following:

1. Design a gymndshes pattem made up of thraa movement skills, hwisting and
‘uming and two balancing skills. Practise and demonstrate your patter

3. With the helo of a map provided oy the teacher, ind the places marked on
ihe map and collect the hidden items. Do this activity ih groups of ten.

i:


--- Page 173 ---
sa mabe RIE OURS, LN a

. a tT .
play mvsic cs @ Percussion Band
combine percussion ang omer rauscal insmunerit
fing theme related sangs
dance to theme ‘elated recorded music.

1,
2.
o.
4.

a
*

L|
"ak
u.

Percussion instrument can be played ta give background muse for Mass DAsplay
perFormoances.

percussion instruments

Mess Dispieys ore ohysical activities which are done by large groucs of peaple
wordng tagether, The Mass Displays activities are made up of music, arb and
orena chorecgraphy. Mass displays activites a’e Usually planned ta be pertormed
on speciel days such a8 Independence Day, school open days and sports
competitions. Mass Displays ara dare in order to:

. provide edutainment to ihe audience

* promote fitness and health for the perfonners
- teaen about avr hiswary and developmerit

» promote Unity dnd peace

» celebrate a particular ochievementfevent

+ jaspire the audience

+ motvate/cheerlead sport athleles



--- Page 174 ---
Background music is the tyoe of music used curing Mass Displays. This music can
be ployed fram the radio or by bends that play different musical instruments,
Percussion Inshuments can provide music for Moss display pefarnances. The
misic wed for performances can ether be the traditional sengs or the modern
music, The music has ta be related to (he activites {hat the perforoers will be
doing. Fer example, when oerformanrca is on agrcolture in Zimbabwe, the tyoe of
music might include traditional songé like “Torai mapoedzea muchirima’.

Percussion insiruimenis

Peaple olaying the differant instruments
aa. he comoined to form a bard. The
percussion bard alays instrumercts wind
sings. Pércussicn Band music has fo
be related fo the performances dene.
Different woes of drums are wsed ms
percussion nstrument For bpackgresid
mmiusks. These dtm praouce different
squnds whith carn be used ta guide the
rmeovoment of the performers.

5nare drum

big dim Gunga

“nae peer: pat .
Play the different drums with the offer mémbers of your group. Each mernber

Clays one cf the instruments below, Sing a fhamiliar seng as you ploy the
ins trUments.

raligé liarigh:

bear ce

jingles

Percushon music is usually played tc a sang. The song is usudlly wien dowri
cowindg how the different ingtyments are played. The paércussion instrurrnieri's


--- Page 175 ---
“ne,

shown in Figure 27.2 produce different scurds. The instruments are played Dy
differert rreambers ina band.

view videos of a percussion band, $ee how learners dances according 10 sounds
riage oy the instruments.

1). Draw a percussion instrument of your CHoce,
> Make your chosen percussien instrument.

Manlmba

o al.

Marimbas are another type of percussion nstruments. The set of marimba
inshumments i nade up ch marmbas of different sizes. The combination of the
Aitferent sizes af marinas can mare a manmba bond. Marmbas can also be
combined with Ihe other percussion inshymer’s,

yi

Stay your instruments a3 @ group following the patterns in the picture oelow.
Fon groups of 12 members, wo members mus! choose the some instrument. for
example. clappers. Play the instiiments as a band,

Ipere are other musicalinstruments thet we ccm play os we perform Mass Display
activines, These instuments can provide good background music Exanmpies of
mugcel instruments that can be ployed are the brass instrument that are usually

layed by the police band.


--- Page 176 ---
a
Brass instruments

saxophone bomb ari trurnpat

Figure 27.4 shows some of the examypves of brass instruments that con be played
tor Mass Displays. In Zimboaowe mast ofthe Mass Displays pefonmances at nation!
levelarc dane using background Anusic provided by brass bands, The police brass
bond onary brass band orovides the rnusic. At yourscheeols you can learn to play
thesc insiiments for your own Moss Displays performances. The brass instruments
can be played by blowing arid ther.

The brass bond is using different lyoes af brass instruments. They are playing the
soxephone. the trumper and the trombone.

Woodwinds

Wie lan net


--- Page 177 ---
The atharset of instruments that can be played for Mass Displays performances are
in the class of woodwinds, Figure 27.4 shows examples of woodwinds instruments.
These instruments are ale played by blowing at inte them. Wacdwind instruments
can be played by a band.

Pan .
os eee

Ferm a band of ten members. Sing a sang of your choice while The other
members play the woodwind instruments.

low. ane dre éxcmples af percussion inswuments.
4 Gress instruments includes — aed oe
4 Draw ond label wo woodwind instruments,



--- Page 178 ---
a EMBED good,
cesign shapes and symbcls for background art
cecordhe shoes and rymnbols
Mount shapes ord symbole a. '

disolay backgrewnd ar depicting themes.

I.
2.
3
4.

Background ortis wed to give meaning to activities in dss Displays. The ouroose
of background artis fo gre moe Imfocnation on the gymnastics and music thet
will be ployed,

gna rene

In Moss Displays musi. crt
and gymnastic rowtines are
used 1o ge meaning to the
performance. Backercund
ans onimpotantcamponent
lhoi dhe oudience jee
fla get The | 6omedning of
the performances. The
background art is displkayed
In the forn ef banners and
poster. Fhe background art
can 92 displayed om Books
ond pieces of cloth.



--- Page 179 ---
‘en.

Peslormers con dispiay background an by apening colored books wilh diferent
shapes and pictures, Figure 28.1 shows differart parts of a picture joined to form
one large picture. The words ‘STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE ore formed on the
eolours in the picture.

Meteria's used ta rake background ar.

. . soe : 4 oh all | j
_ —_> € > ee ro ee Fi
a rulers
part
paint brushes - vill
crayons eraser

Ihe materials shawr in Figure 28.2 are used in designing backgrownd art.
Decorations on background art can be done wing paints. crayons and pencils,
. oh .

Desisning and decerating on
art involves ihe wse of different
colours. ine colours wsedinchide
ihe primary and secondary
colours, Primary colours ore
yellow. blue and red. When
the primary colours are mixed,
they form secandary Colours.
You can create more colours
by mixing the different primary
and secondary colours, Mixing
colours alsa creates different
shade: of the colours that you
have already made.

+

Sead
—
+

Figure 23.3 shows the different
shades of cofcurs that can be
Forrned by mixing colayrs. Some
ef the calours formed ore eilher
dark cr light,



--- Page 180 ---
wa

Practise pabsng celours to form diferent shades and colouns. Use the mixed
colours ko decorate the piciures of vour choice,

foe

ai
F

i

ve
a)
a)

ich

ee

x. Ais

pub:

Dvwde your piecesof white paper into 16 of equal squares. Draw The Gesigns af
repeat patterns Using a ruler as snows in Figure 26.4, Choose one pattern you like
aind caint the shoes uwiing different colours.

Shapes of different sizes and designs can be made by printing using potaloes,
lagves or other materials and paint on paper or cloth These material produce
diferent caints used os background ont. See Figure 28.5 of a lear print.

- ow

Crow an object of your choice. In the example shown in Figure 28.6, a gloss wa
drawn, Te come up with the outline of the glass use a rectongviar frame. Afler
drawing the outline of the glass, use a pencil to shade the glass lo come Up wrth

o well decorated object.


--- Page 181 ---
ee eee ee

a
ar
EH
a= oF
ao. Bl
* The frst step in drawing the flawer is fo make an outline as shown in Figure

28.7a, ,
© Then make stencils ot three items: a leat. a flower ond a triangle.

* Use the slencils in Gesigning a ‘lmewer on the first picture you have diciwn.
» Shade the pictures Using a pencil or paint using the desired colours see Figure

38,7).
+ Display the artwork you have produced.

Grids gre squares used to make sure accurate drawings can be designed, The
grids aré drawn using tight pencils 50 that ihey can be easily mbbed at the end.

| o | ;
ae es ~ -.|
i . .
LF 1 . O-
7 SEF! enh ia
Lee i
s i we
-. fn 4
ee:
1
_™. J



--- Page 182 ---
Craw one Face os in grids shown in Figure 28.8}.
Kigke sure each part cf the foce isin the camect grid.
RUG off the lines thot term the gras.

Shade the face using aq dark Pencil.

Diploy your artwork,

-_ +: F &

Pasters can be designed in differés' czes using shapes and symbols. Ir hicss
Deploys, they educale the qudtence on whats being pe forned, In the cxcrugle
shown in Figure 28.9 the theme is ‘Athletics Day’. The poster shows the differart
acy ties that can be done in athletes.

Design o poster for yourschool's sports day.


--- Page 183 ---
Se ee ce ae

1. penorr rhythmic vanotons in movemnertt,

“a - tow
We can enter he arena in Mass Displays using differant ways. One of the warys
of entering the arena in Mass Displays is thie: Fie fornia tion.

a . -
b

LY ied
: ros

rhythen aren file formation

7

r

Movernents performed in Mass Digplays fallow the rhythm af music and can be
repeated over and aver. Rhythm is the repeated pattem of sound. The sound can
he from percussion instruments like drums and cymbals or other musical instumernts
available. & bend can also provide The music for the performances.

There cre a variety of movements that can be pertomed in Mass Displays, Activities
that can be perfarmed are presented tn tne following section far you te practise
in Groups,

1. Mevement and rhythm shapes

» Stand ’n files giving each other eneugh space.

» March following the beat fron the drum played by Ihe teacher te clo “he
following movements.

« lop marching and stretch high and wide as the wall.

* March forward eight steps and stop.

®


--- Page 184 ---
= + » AJ

Fall and spréad vourself wide: os
shown in Figure 29.7 2).

Ul ap into dd fight oll for Pour ceunts
Fac Lpoedrds.

Cudan ase side only and then on
the other side,

0 The Foid drum beat juno up evith
your hands above your head like an
COIT Gh".

On mext drm beat. fall and be
naraw and shar on the floor. Seo
Aigure 29.0 f],

shond ue and start marching again.

Rhythm running aad ploying

hark Out cl Circular running tack
stand around the track in freaspuce,
Lister to t= music os you weak om the
some spot and lay jingles ji time te
Phe PSH.

Walk ind clackwite direction cs ¥a
Play te the bet oF the music.

Now jog to the next bect.

Wher yo Rear *he cammand
‘Twit, pair up wih a oortreras you
‘og around the track. Keep in step
with each other ond tn time with the
music 5 YOU run. 468 Figure 29.2.

Cin the signal ‘Fours’, farm groups of
Taur anc run besides each other in
tine with the rmnusic.

Cn the signal coc] down slow down
hoa walk with your group but kee in
hoe to the ousic.

Rhythm vsing rbbons

Moke mrethm ribbons by aihaching
ho fo four memes of plastic or silk
ribbons te a stick 50cm long. Figure
27.3 ah. wt
Hold your nibban and stand fociag the leader.

awing abban fram side ro ade tke car wipers ot the same time fallowing the
music Gest. Figure 29.3 67.

awng ribpanin circles overhead like a neicacter in time to music. Figure 29.3

ae



--- Page 185 ---
Torn your own rhythm and movement activities in Your Groups. Perform the

Make the figure-8 in fant like a butterfly, Soe Figure 27.3 al,

Make ihe fiqure-§ over hed.

Make sairals trem left to right and then from right to lefHike c snake. see Figuire
29.3 St.

New cemcine ihe swinging of [he ribbon with marching.

Al rioben movements shoula be dane in fiene te msl.

ee

movements lollowing music Of yout GWwr choice.



--- Page 186 ---
itr riot is iif
ts o. soo. vo

>. pera vorigus physical exercees Combined with arena movements.

Mass Gisplays is made up of a variety of movements to shaw the Thepre being
displayed, Choreography is movements that are demonstrated by performers
In iss Caspleys.

e YWirs 3
rh .
- kh .
signal gymnastics formations choreography
theme oudience

Choreography i the woy movements
are done during dancing, Movement
iS done ta the musi and differs:
movement potterns are weed.

The dancers a dancing in a fie
Formahoen and ter poavement is the
same, Im Mass Displays the dancers
dence to music that is appropriate to
the theme. The dancers must combine
diffarent dancing styles.

The dancers in Figure 30,2 ane jumping
and moving in different patterns. This
type of dancing helps to keep the
body fit. The dancer are putting on
suitable ctothes for this yore of dance,

The other physical exercises that can
be done in Mass Displays include Ire
following:



--- Page 187 ---
- 64 * @

Dancing hoops

Ge oa hoop and had tt
honzon' oly cverhead.

Lower the hoop four fires

following the beat of music. @
Bend to the right, straighrer a

and bend ta the left. (2) "2
al

Repeal Four times bs c
Place heap en the door and eu
step inside. See Figueé 30.3}. eal
} Sa
2)

}

Jog ten times.

Hep on your right feet in and .
etoef yaurhoas na clockwise .
diecticon. zight limes. ‘
change happing feat and
recon nthe opposite divacticn
eign times.

Side ack around your hoops fer eight steps in one direction and ther eight
steps in another direction. 3e¢ Figure 30.3).

etn
Wee.

Mae et, oMmers oaderming & =: >

Rope exerches

a.
E

al “
_ §

a}

i

Hold a skipping rope on a free space.

Jump using the skipping rope ta the be at of music.

Stretch rope clong the floor and do push ps to the beat of music. Figure 40.4
].

Jump the rape again.

Crop tne rape and de crab kicks in crab walking position. Figure 30.4 ch.
Do a rape stretch side to side halding the rope side to side,

Jump Ihe rope,

©


--- Page 188 ---
= Drop the rope and do jhe side léz-lifts om the floor,
e Jump ihe rope again.

* Held folded rope and do curlups. See Figura 30.41.
Fr Jump he rope.

* Do another rape slretch aclewearys,

All thes® exercises are done cartinuausly following the bedt of music.

3. Malt exercises

+ Geto matoand ploaceil on your own free space,

* Stand neor your mat,

* When the music starts, run around the mat without tevching ik

= When the music stops. jump onte a mat and reniain there until you hear the
music ogc.

= Hop around the mat and when the music stops do a farward roll on the mat.

* Fun around the mot aed when the music steps. perform o cartwheel on the
rrtat.

» Welk around while the teacher jos the mcts

= Ferd coluran and stretch a piece of clath above you,

* forma wovy movement by staring fram a crauching position to a standing
posiFign.

= The movement up and down must be done slowly so that a wavy movement
con be farmed,

[. Besgn tracttiongl dance movement pattems using apmropiate equipment
hke sticks and chay pot.


--- Page 189 ---
7 “fs Seren
pee ye ric
ote dge he hi ra) -

1. display themes tnrasgh fermatians.

“e Sgaiets ees wee ee ee ee
In Mass Displays we use different types cf formations. Fernations are paltemns
usec for movements in Nass Displays, These formations are whed in different
stages af the pedtormance.

sy WOTGS

eolumn formation file farmafion

Formdiians aire ways in which groups ef performers or things are omanged inta
different shapes aor patterns. These formations are usec in Mass Displays te make
digclays more interesting. The, help in descrbing what. the performers yall be
daing. For example, if They want te show G hervesting act, they stand in different
formarigns and perform the digging using Noes.

Earmations are divided into two types which are dimple formations and the
complex fanmatians.

lL. Simple formations

Tne simple formations ore ued fo
maintain order during the Mass Display
performances, Excarnprles ot the ample
tommations are:

+ File fennatien - this 1s when
performers stand in a straight line
one beRind the alher-



--- Page 190 ---
* Columnfisear formation - this 3s vhen pertormers stand in 4 straight line sce
cry sides,

a THe

1
wrle

* Circle formation = this is when performers stand forming a circle.

: furl ar a

® Square formation — this is when certormers stond forming a square,

we tal add



--- Page 191 ---
2. Complex formations

These are difficult formations where performers form different shapes Lising simple
formations. Performers fam the complex Formations by Bending. sitting and
carrying each other. Examples of comples formations ore:

Star farmation
The star formation is made up of columns and files. The performers Can make Use
al different colours or equipment ta design a star formation.

=

-

§.shaned formation
The s-shoped formation so mare challenging formaition thet forms several s-shapes.



--- Page 192 ---
“
Tae use of signals in forviectfinng

Signals from the teacher or a group ieacder can be wsed Ic organise pérforness

Into differant Fornations. The teqche: can use words and hand signals te give the

petfornerrs instructions an the formations ta come up with Formations aad groupe

Exomples of activities that cam be cane by the pertomners io oracse following

the sigrals cre.

i. Groups

* Stand inc file,

© When ihe teacher cals a number, you Form groups of the number called out,
Far examp'e, the number '?' the whole class fomns groups af three.

- When the number three is called out, oll members form the group wilh Ine
sme of players

- Files
= Stand oubice the arena.
- When he leoder axtends the ammns forward, this means Un ond sit cress-laggqed

in files
» Whenthe leader extends anns sideways, ihis means sfand in Coalurings.

Dees OL SIMA ere.

Performers in Mass Displays can cemb ne fermotions in order fe show The meaning
of tigir performances. They can corbine severaf simple formations 16 farm words
malcled to the theme of their performance.

oa !05t 1 Ames display performance for in dependence celebration

Figure 31.1] shows performers demonstrating an Independance day Pheme. In
order to showcases the theme they combine different Formations. These forraations

are related io fhe background crt.
©

:


--- Page 193 ---
an a
abo —_ :

1. Whar are the ‘ormations that can be seer. in the Independence day theme
shaven by "he aetormers in Figure 34.17

Design the lornahons faran Indeserdence day theme.

i)

woes ee me eee eee ee ee _—_—_——_ -

Flan as a class the positions that each member should take ta form the wad §
ofthe theme independence celebratian’.

_ ore Wwadowind musrcal asniments.

—.. and
We can play @ ‘lute using _. ..—_.

Write the importance Of Mass Displays.

_ The type of art used in Mass Dis olay ig calkec] —_..__.

PD

5. When igihe came of the insiument showr inthe octuse?

4. The primary colours are nd

7. The squares used ta make accurate drawings in artare caled ..___.
A —. _is the repeated potter of sound.

7 J and _. ore formations used in Mass Displays.

10. Give one example of a camples Fornaticn.

lL Whatis choreography?

12 Write down any two themes that can be wed in Mass Displays.



--- Page 194 ---
* Mass Deplay: are physical activities done by large groups af oeople lo
entertain and educate an avdiance.

+ The physica performances ore done with the aid of background art, and
MUsic

= The music for Mass Displays con be provided by percussion insluments, and
other musiceal instruments like the brass and woodwind insturments.

- (Cifferent movement pattems can be dene wing equioment to provide

beautiful pertormances.
+ Mass Diplay parormances on the arena are done in differant formations.
* The formations have to belinkéd lo the background ert to bring aut the theme

of the perfornance.

background music Music Used ta central movement and formations in Mass

Displays °
bockground cat — the art usec -o give Ihe meaning of thé peronnances
arend — 4 rnarked areq where Mass Deploys are done
choreography — movements a activities dome by performers in the arend
designing — «creating sor ething in a dedred way
dacorating * . gmaking something ook more attractive by adding some

pic tres and designs
movements that ore amilartowoves that ore petanned
by One of more people

Wavy movement

hand signal _ = signs made by moving hands 1 give instructions
theme — the main ides shown in a perormance in Mass Display
audience - fhe peonte watching 4 perfomance
columnfarmmaiion - the formation where people stand side by side

file formation — dfoannotion where people stand one benind the other
complex formations- these «re difficult tyres of formations which invelwe a
combination of many formations

. Choose he correct answer.

1 Which one is not cd percussion instrument?

A. Trompet B. Jingle ©. Brum D, Manmnba
?, Which one is an example of a Brass instument?
A, Saxophone B. Flute C. Triangle D. Jingle


--- Page 195 ---
of qoawoodwind instrument,

a

404A. ob on example
| 4, triangle A, facerder CG. maolet CD. drum
ia oA ond ___ are instruments thet con be played by blowing air inta
: then.

a4. Bross and woodwind
B. Brass and percussion
C. Percussian ond brass
BD, Woodwind and percussion

6. The picture shows a drawing dane using —_.—_.

A. shapes B. grics Cc, circles C. triangles
A... isan example of a prignary caleyr.
4, Red B. (Gren i White D, Grey
f, is the repeated patterr. of sound. i
A. Percussion & Movement C. Rhythm OC. Formations |
R, is the wey movements are done curing dances?
4, Background art B. Background music ,
Cc, Arena acts” BD, Cheorecgraphy
@ and __..._ are examples ot sina formations, |
A. Fre and star &, Oelurmin and flower :
©. Celunma and file O. Flower and star
10. Hend sana can be used to give —_ —— Ta performers in Mass Displays.
A. antenainment B. instructions ;
Co rmwsc RD. crt
11. All performances in Mass Displays are quiced by a chosen . ;
A. heme B. dance music D. farmation
1? A combination of formations can be used an the arena To form —_..-—- tiruct
show the theme.
A. beards Bo music Cc. lines Co wards
; Suc wed Guedes
| Answer the following questions.
1 end. __ are exarnples of percussion instrumants.

2 Amarimba i a hype of —__. imstrurmean:s.

—_—oo_,_--



--- Page 196 ---
oom On be ow

DoH

— eee NE ore brass instuments.

A flute anda clarinet are examples of ww rnusicar instruments.
Background art can be displayed in the form of ond
Backorcuned ant can be decorated using different coloured _

Simple formations are wsed in perarnances Is maintain — dung
Performances,

Cine example of comples fornabens is the —  —_ termaiticn,

The eader or the teacher can wse the voice or the — fo give

instructions in Mass Digelays.

Jind Mass Dissdays pertonmance the music, at, choreography and arena acts

must follow a given.

a) Ingrmups, design a Mass Dipleys performance Using the following:
* theme of your choles. ;
= background art
* Bockgraund music
* grena activities
= formotions
BI Perfor Ihe octivithes that you nove designed in groups,


--- Page 197 ---
instructions

1. Answer all questions.
2. Choose the comect answer.

i. Aderies of organs joined fogether 10 stare and rargport food fem the— —.

A, breotning syslém B. eating syitem
©. digestiar system OD. storing system
Use the picture of the digestive system to ariswver Question 2.
a
we

& ——

$ Which organ A.B. Corbis fhe ermal intestine?
4. Saliva is mixed vath food in the mouth $3 that if can move smoothly down ‘he
4. Sfullet “ B. oxygen . liver DB. small intestine
4. The ~-___- Shares mare food in the digestive: systern.
A quilet BR. ver
Cc. stomach small intestine
5. Foeces fremibe bady after digestion are remaved through the —— —.
A. anus . Bosraalkirtestine  <. shamach D. mouth

The model below represents the breathing system.

4. Inthe picture, the lungs ore represented by the letter

©



--- Page 198 ---
1d.

20.

The muscle ihe ¢epaoaroabes the chest and abdomen is called the —.....

A. Figg B. diaphragm C. oir sqic D. wirdpips:

Alin T@ lungs 15 stored by tae

A. ibs BA. owind pipe . bronchus Doin seat

The other name for the trachec is the

A. throat Bo mawtin . windpipe wore Box
.frecthing is tne movement of airitand out of the body througan the

A. ears BH. eyes C. nose CG sicand
The name of the gas an ihe air thet people need 6

4, oxygen B. water vapaur

© steam CD coarben dioxide
The — in fhe nose helps toc ean oir.

4. saliva a. mucu, C. bone B. hear

Which activity helps to improve heolth and fitness?

&, Reading A, Wrtiess , Drawing DO, Cycling

The phyacal activity sagan in the picture is cated

4. hoarse riding: Bjoern g CL. psunding OD. skipping
1S. Which one i neato rule used when camping?

A. Carnchires rust be supervised B. Behove welll
Cl. Ao smoking DL Littering (5 allowed

JA OUD used in —
4, netball B. so0rnce: ©, boxing 2. hopscotch

J shot put, otter Throwing, the alhieté muetleave lhe ihrowing area only farn
the —__ OT the circle.
4A, Back B, front ©. right Che left

Jn the Svirniaiig pool we are not aiowed be.
AL dive B. eat GC. submerge D, floary

J Hien — spore
4, walking B. mountaineering
Co funni D. dancing
In 2018, the first Friday of every month in Zimbabwe wos declared the ____....
4, Women's Droy B&B. National Aids Day
. Nahenal Chean-up Bay O. Teachers’ Gay


--- Page 199 ---
371.4 book where you record all the physicch activities done every day i tre

4. dictigrary B. diary C. Bible GC. atlas

90. Wheatus the nance of this disecse”

a. Typehosd B. Gore . Diabetes CG. Rickets
$3 cock af exercise can result im —-

4. tyaheid B. goite &. nckets O, obesity
44 The deficiency disease caused by lack of proteins i —_

A ore BR. marasmus

ne DD, kewaoshiakor
49 4 fracture is a broken —_——_-

A, stick B. wood C, bene 0. teeih
94.4 dislocation takes Glace an q - .

A. muscle B. joint ©. pone BD, mouth
a7, es an example ef ao dangersus water body,

», Borehole B. Senced swimming pool

rm. Protected welll D. Disused oravel pit
74. Gravel pits have undervafer ——_ — which may cause drowning.

4. Td “ B. ligrt (c. fish DO. air
9 The woter sauce tate for Selig is G —— -—:

A, sewoge pord Bo oswimming pec <<, gravei pit OD. ver
a0, Which one is nat o swimming pool weca tion?

A. £eeping the pool clear B. Co net swallow pool water

& Swallow the waler if you are thirsty OD. Keep pets cut of the pool
27 Which one is moto survival technique in waiter?

A. Treading water B. Floating on the back

© Swiraming using @ side strok> D. Wearrng shoes durings. mrnund
42 You can enter the deep eed ol jhe swimming pool by —— —.

AL Giving Bo railed

©. tumble tuming bb. being pushed by fiends
43 Wnatis ihe mame of the diving position?

4. Sitting

BE. Knesling

©. Squating

DB. Standiag


--- Page 200 ---
a4, The start ned ime rid de and long oistance: is the __. _.

A. sprint start B. flying start C. crouch start DD, serve skince
a4. During the se? postion, you mus: raise *he —___..— slightly higher "har the
shoulders.
A legs B. Fears £. head D. ip
94. How many mene farm a tearrina 4% 100m relay race?
4&. Four BR. Five c. ix GO. S4venr

—~ @ ©

oC. D,
37. WhicP “implement iS used in shat pout?
38. In race walking the athletes must never have beth —____ oft the ground.
A. @bows B. hands c. feet DG. knees
39. A race run over different places tikes Pills, Grass ond rivers is colled =...
4. hurdles A. orods-courtry
_ spriat D. middle distance
40, Hor, step and jump ore stages of — jump,
A pale vGult B. lord Chg D. triple
[4 rmocar<s|
Asmwver all fhe questions
1. The windpipe 6 port of the .....-_. system, 11]
2. The function of tne large intestine is to abserk ——_ andl _. “4
°3. Draw the breathing system and label (he following parts
, a| Nose
is) Wind pipe
c) bunds
q| Binehragn [4]
4. Three diseoses caused oy poor saritary conditions are ————, —_ saan
_—___ [3]
5. Typhoid is caused by gérrns called —___, [4]
4. Bilhorzia is caused by — found in stagnant water in areas lke dans and
rere. a [1]
f.

The hype of tre injury show. in the picture $ —— [7]


--- Page 201 ---
~~

8. the two types of diving positions are | .— ard. —__. [2]
9. Asafer way of leaming the diving skill is to vse the — of the pool. [1]
10. Exemples af dangerous weter badies for swimming are ond a
if|
1! and — _. ore examples ct kyoyancy cids used For sotely in
Sa romning- 2]
12, The sell o? turning under water is Called ——____. 11]
13, Two byes of horzornbkal pirnps are _ and —_ [Z]
l4. Draw a javelin anc label the following parts
* Head
= Sch
s Core gp [2]
FS. The stating technique bsed ‘nm sprints is te ——__. [i]
[25 roarks]

Demonstrate the following:

i. The serink start technique. + =. [5 marks}
2. Javelin gfip and thrawing. [S marks]
3. Side stroke. [5 roarks]
4,

Kneeling diving [§ ress]

Lf


--- Page 202 ---
Instuc horns
1, Answer oll questions.
2. Choose the carect answer.
1. Which one is oun external booy part?

A, Storrach B. Liver , Intestine oO. Skin
A source of water that transport water from a dor te flelds is collec __..

A. darn B. Wver

2, swimming pool 0. water caret
3. Soccer anexample of _.. ..cames.

AL inwosion B. target . striking DC. comfiot
4. One advantage of moving infe space i that.

A. it dllows p ayers to moke decsians

B. iP allows oooonents 4a know the ne@xt movement vou plan 2

C_ affects the wey the tearm plays

GC. it wil not allow you ta poss
5. One of the skills, Jet used in ivasian Qeores is

A, behing BR. possi C, tirowair ng D. attask ne
4. One of the playing positions For boséboll players is a5 a ;

A. qoole B caigher C. keeper OD. forware
F. The . _ Fits tHe ball using a bcitin Gaseball.

4A. fonvward  , & potter ©, fielder DB. pitcher
5. A is *he name of the esudment used im tennis,

A. packet B. beam &. plate DB. wicket
7. n target games players score when they successfully throw ov strike an object

closer tod. ;

4. hand B. target ©, cambat CO. leg
1. Tanget ganas ane _.

A. darts and pin bowling B. dorts and bose

h. saccer and en bowling D, soccer and tennis
11. The equicment with ao pant colled tre bullkeye i used in.

4. bosebail B. darts C. pin boaling 0. seccer
12. Loe BO Japanese conrbal gane.

4, Cricket B. Jude . Gearts 0. Tug af war
13. la oder to balance in most games we musk use the comect_.

A. stance B. pike c. tackle D. krcking
14. Ji mo? oO stroke in ferris.

A. Forehand BE. Yolley C. Front crawl D. Backhand
15. The —_____ stroke couses the bail ‘orotate ip tennis.

A. lob Bf. seve ©. $pn DG. smash



--- Page 203 ---
1é. his gapis usedin_. = —_.
AL Coker B. baseball ce. herinds D. pin bowling
17. Which shape ia formed by the thumb and torefinger in the crickel batting orp?
A. Wech.doe B. Veosbowe Cc. Ysahope B. T-shape
18. Ta practse the bosic grip tor baseball hal you rmnust place the hand of the bat
myvyour ww.
A. bottom B. top =, back 0, hoant
16. The riddle part of a cricket pall has @ joint catled ,
AL fitbbon B. seam Cc. mark Cy. lire
aC. in aoventuse activities a raftis weed for __ —_.
A. trarspcrt 8, climbing Cc. hiking D. cycling
21. Another name for cycling & — .-—_.
Aa. hiking B. biking &. rafting D. abseiling
33, Ona bicycle orakes are used tp ——.—.
A. suppert cyclist * B. requce speed
Cc. increase peed D. tom the bike
22. [he skill of getting anto the sadale af a bicvele is caled _. ;
4A, iki B, biking =, mounting D. dismaunting
td Poddles ure wed ta drive a —__. —_.
Al oh . B. picycie Cc. cance D. motorbike
25,0 wee is an activily of descending a vertical tock surface using a doubles
a oe
A. eeloyieg A. canoeing ©, sallirig D, abseilling
34 What is the name of the knot shaovnin the picture chovet
A. Sheet bend 6. 3qearé Cc. Gyverhand D Lash
57 The techn que used in binding wooden acles with a rope is _.
A. hing &, lashing CL. widpping OG. crossing
28 We Use — to play morimba.
A. ma'let B. metal ¢. tiangle 0. jingle

2F.

_. is the wate: sport that uses wink ta move the boat,
A Ganseng B&B. Rafting Cc, soln CD. Swimming”



--- Page 204 ---
a

30.

da.

ao.

MWh one is notanéxarpte of satety equioment for cimbing mountains?

A. Hemet B, Boots with megils (2. Saks CD. Ropes
a]. —____ is the process of holalng rope and the climber to avoid fetling.

A. Balancing B. ADS ling CG. sailing OD. belaying

Wich skill is needed in farming py rarnids?

A, Absceing B. Balancing <, Belaying D. Soulirigy

Dunng cienteeing, a i used to find direction.

A, CORPS B, ruler mc BD. flag

ao.

3&.

38.

BY,

40.

.4& cembinaticen ot activites which farm a pattem in gymnastics is called

. Balances whien form shapes which ore the same on beth des when divided

irte feo parts ore Wow. W.. balances.

AL Symmetry BA, osymmetry f. running DC loeomonhior
An area marked using a nbboan crrepe for onenteenng is called a
CoOune.

4. sting B. shert C. larg D. flag

In Sy mnestics, laceration means -

4. Eolancing an ene leg

B. travelling fram one point fa.anc ther

f.. Balancing on harn|s

DC. balancing in groups

A, bolance . rouhre C. dancing D. léecemeation

Tris type of balance is collead a

A, handstand B. pyramid

Cc. walkover OD, jack-knife jump

A Deron wht supports another person in dymnastics 6 called a.

A spotter Bo beeleryer (i. sailor Di, cyelist |

Kd bE

In gymnastics this activity is called
A, forvord wdleover B. formwardroll ©. ‘headspring D, head balance
[40 rnarks]

e


--- Page 205 ---
Answer oll the questions.

1,
2.
a

ooh &

as

The ¢kil: of getting off the oicycle is _ . [1]
When sailing tie boatuses  -__ pushec By wind in erdeér to move. [1]

The most important equioment for climbirg and abseiling are _ ond
a. [2]
We cane and during orienleennd, r2]
Two excuniples of striking games are __. —_-and — ; Z|
Agmmetical bolances farm . which are nov the came when dwided
inte tea, [+]
Two types of material that can be used to make a mir. W— end
_ . [2]
dow many players take part in the game cl rotating cricket? r}]
The two rules used in battle game are. -—_ ana . , (2]
The tee skills which can be used in jude are —___ ane —______. [2
_ easton Ges Involve _ and _ [2]
One principle of defending n invasion games is —_..—. “ly

The canitre part of a dart Seard ‘5 called - _- . ‘1]

(One ot the skills used in ain bowling is called

_ Arigna stroke used a8 a defence stroke to rnave the opponent away from the
Lo

[:]

[i]

[22 miaries|

ne? is coiled the _

_ Besign 4 qyvemnastics pettern made yp of five movement skills, balancing ang

heady snapes. Demonstrate your pattem ir not more than & rarvutes.
[AG rocks]

_ Demonstrate pin bowling using the underarm skill [holding the fall, stepping

forward with the opposite leg, wnderarrn trawing, targeting) - {5 marks]

— Demonstrate the serve for tennis ball (holding the racket using correct grip.

iossing the Boll. driving fhe racket ta hit thé ball and hitting and Fellow throug’).
[5 morks]


--- Page 206 ---
insiructions

1. Answer all questions

2. Choose the comrect answer.

Use the piciuré of a mode! of the breathing system lo onswer questionl,

Inthe picture above, the rib cage is represented by the lehter
The muscle -hakis found below the lungs i called the

hy

AL fis > BE. diaphragm Cir sc Do windpipes
3. Alpin the lungs i stered by fhe —____,

A TIS B. owIndpipe CF. broncrus D. Gir sac
4. The port of the body which pumps blood is the

4. ris B. hear C, brain D. luigs
S. Feod is mevect tram the mouth oo the sramncacn tieaugh the _.

A. trachea B, quilory C. liver D. intestine

é&, The punoase af bones in our body 6 ta,
A, support the body B. cory tlood C, break food DB. corryoxygen
7. Which oclyity helps to maorove health and filress?

4. Reading B. Funrang C. Drawing GO. Witing

& Physical activities help to improve .
. 4. oloed B. obesity C_ neighi Cr. fitness

9. Which of the fallowing is a water acifivity?

A Camping B. Onenirig ©. Canoeing D. Hiking
IG, Disenses caused by lack of nuisents are called Ss diseases.

A. deficienty B. tontact C. infectious 3, kilser
l1. Weick one is rotan nfectious disease?

4. Cholera B. Dyertery fC. Typhoid GB. Obesity
12. In the gymnasium, the athdetes are not dllowed to wear .. .

A. ciothes B. gymnastics shoes

f. nas ded racklaces DO. leéotards

©


--- Page 207 ---
20.

Zl.
Be.

a‘.
Za,
2h.

27.

™

The tempxerature af water in the gravel pit 5 24 cold iret it oor. couse = _.
A. pdiaria B. cholera C. cold shock DB. adesity
4 dstence mn by one athlete in -elay is coled _

A. baioen B. relay ©. leg 0, Beul
OWwhen swimming we must kega . —_— equipment close ta The swirrming
poal all the time.

A. Siding B cyeling C. litesaving OC. oremnieering
Which one snata stoke in eviraming?

4. Backnond a. Breoststroke oC. Front crawl = 3. Back crawl
Water palo is & — .—___ pon.

A aqualit B. siviking , cormoat D, target

oWhais the nace of the strake shown in the ochre above?
A. Breast sroke B, Sack crawl ©, Front crowd D. Side stoke
In aihletics a race where athleles run over absiaches 6 called —-
A. relay B. Heh imp C, hordes DB. lang yurmp
During the set position. you must raise the _ slightly higher shan Ihe
snGulders.
A legs B. tonds GC. hip

; D.

Why oh imcnernien: is sed in sawelin?

The byoe of jump made up ot three jurnyps 2 the — —_.

A pole woul B. hong jure E, hah jump D. tiple purnip
Barts ve an example of. - - GOMES,

4, invasion B. target c. dking CG. combat

Which ane is not a skill used in striking games?

&. Throwing B, Cotching C. Boating D. Kicksng

The... _ strikes tre boll using a Bot im baseball.

A, Batter B. goolie . fighter OD. pitcher

Ininayesion garres, mayers atiack and. -—_

4& dance B. swt c. ‘climb Db, defend

The wicket keeper uses The __ stance to see all the bals clatertoa target.

4. Fbing start B, crouch C. serve CD. athack

o



--- Page 208 ---
a

“ev...

34.

4.

oe.

af.

a8.

oF.

called _.

4, karate B. dearts a. jude B. tug of war
J... baotan example of adventure achvities.
A. Cycling B. Camping
©. Mountain climbing DO, Athletics
To show that you want ta turn wher sigralling, wou use - rials.
4&. hand B. leg ©. head BD. toot

Whar name do we give to equipment used to drive a raft ara cance?

A, Pecdol B. Wheels i. Sticks DO. Paddles
. ison achvity of descending 4 vertical eck surface using a doubled
rele
A Selayirng B. Canceing fl, sculing D. Abseiling

3. Never light o fire inside 4s during camping.
A. tent 6. pit , house 0. caciaine
Which one is no! a “ype of knoe te tying?
A. Overhand Bs Sguare kneat = . bashing D Sheet enc
WrIch Skil is needed in forming myramicds?
A. Abseiling B. Balancing CL, Beloying CO. Saiing

we.

Tris an example of a_ _belance,

A. symmetry B. osynrnetry ©. running D. lacamaran
A Combination of oc tyaties wich ‘orm a pattern in ayenoastics is colled _.
AL gymnashcs outine B. ogymnastics bolance

&. dancing D. lacearncoticn

In gymnastics. this activity is called _

4, Lpswing B. forrcars reall c. headsping 0. cartwheel
The importance of learning gymnastics is to ,

AL improve fitmess B. treat distases

C. increcse obesity CG. to increcse height

Which one is nota percussion instument?

A. Flute a B. Jingle a _ ©. Om D. Triangle

©


--- Page 209 ---
. mit
a

y:
1" 4], Werch ones an axample of a br oss insurer?
| A. Triangle B, Tamiaurine . drumpet CG. single

4 42. is nol og gecandary colour.
a! 4. Green B. Purple ©. Orenge BD. Yellow

43. _ goanexample of oc cnmary colar.
4. Rec B. Pink e. Weite Db. Orange
4 44. _ 8 the ;oneated pattern af sound?
_ A, Percussion B. Movement i. Ravinm D. Formation
45 is the way movernents ore cone during dances.

A. Bockaoround art B. Backorouned music
i cc. Arercacis c. Choreegrashy
an 46%. _ it an exornples of compiex formations.

j A file B. column C. square CG. stor
|
be

F,
J 47. The pcture shows an example ofa —_..__ formation.
ip A. flaweor Bo square ©. star D. fle

A 48, Hand signals con be used to give _. to performers in Mass Displays.
“i A. enter cine i BR. instructions Music D. art
“ 49. Mass Dispiays i used fo __- __ peotie.

. A. educate A. tres-t C. faht D. draw
i S04 __is used 16 design Mass Displays activities.

. A. ploy B. theme cc. line Oo. word

bi [SO marks]
™ Par 1f

¥ Ansyver alt fie questions,

_d I]. The stomach $ part of the _. system. [1]

3. The funetion of the lungs is ta —_. [1]

,e _ Draw the digestive system and label the following parts.
: ia oe



--- Page 210 ---
ro on \

na Oo

mee
HT,

T?.
13,
14.
15.
té

Vy,
1a.

tt.

1

Ta precare the becly for games you mustdo. (1
Iwo types cf the INJWAES In sort ore _. ane _ -_ [z]
Ifis dangeraas to dive on the ___ —— end of the pec, [T]
Examples of dangerous water baches for swiroming are mind _.
iZ]
Te yes of trirows ore — end [2]
The skill of gearing on the Bicycle is 2)
scl are pushed by in oraer to mave the boc, (1]
The mostimportant equioment fo: Slimbing and abselling are and
— [2]
, -and - Gre Wed dung onentesring. [2
wo examcles of combct pamesare and [?*]
The equipment used in baseball ave —.___ ond [2

Ine centre oor ofa dart board is Tofled [3]
--  -— ON ore ipross ingsruments, al
wWoverent oF the body from one position fo another in aymnastics is called
ek oe [1]
acckground of can he Gisaloyed tn the form at and _. [7]
Backgrouna art con be decoraters Using different coloured _. [1]
moa Mass Digulays performance the Music, crt, chereography and arena acts
must follow agivan (1]
.- [32 marks]

Design 2 g¥ymncastics pattern made Wp Of ive moverneant skids. SViITIM 2 tric cl
ond asymmetrical balancing and be dy shapes. Demonstrate ¥YOUr pattern in
0G Aner than & minutes,

Cemanstroate the Following:
(2) The sprint skort technique.
ib} discus ic and throwing.
(cs) back crawl in Swimming



