--- Page 1 ---
BA college press

\
i

~ Ventures Primary
Science and
.' Technology

3
=
{ 0

Ey
|
Vo -
|S
=
yD
wr -

~ fBeorge Mujajati
i 2

Learner's Book

|


--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
Ventures Primary
poience ‘and Technology

Learner’ S Book Grage.

24 | colle ge press
|


--- Page 4 ---
Ventures Primary Science and Technology Leaners Book Grade 3

© George Mujajati 2017
© Illustrations and design College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd, 2017

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyright Act, (Chapter 26:05), 2004.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be lia%: ~ for criminal prosecution and
: FTE civil clz’ 1s for damages.

First published 2017

1719212018 16
024681097531

Published by
College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd
P.O. Box 3041, Harare, Zimbabwe

Artworks by
Tendekai Gondo

Acknowledgements
iE The authors and publishers would like to acknowledge
Gateway Primary School for the cover image.

Printed by ORT Printing Services
ISBN: 978 177900 860 2
The publishers have made every effort to trace the copyright holders. If they
have inadvericntly overlooked any, they will be pleased to make the

necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.

It1s ilicga: to photocopy a:ty pase of this bx without written permission from the publishers.


--- Page 5 ---
Contents

Topic 1 Healthy and safety.........cccoovviiiiiiiiriiiimccccne, 1
Unit 1 The human body... 1
UNit 2 NUTTHION ccc 12
Unit 3 Diseases and prevention ......vveieeeeeireeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeaennnns 20
UNIT 4 SOFETY .ouvvieeasssisniimess covivinsissesmivinimisisnsiniosssinraissiabsssssivessoniosss 29
Topic 2 Materials and structures ...........ooevvveiiiiciiirininiiciiicennnnnns 34
Unit 5 Characteristics of materials... 34
Unit 6 Elements, mixtures and compounds........ccceeeeeieeeeciennnees 37
UNITE 7 TOOIS 1isnsssmiinsinsions sinsasesss sss sastasssiisnassions sssinissssiossssrmereinreess 4]
Unit 8 SIMUCTUES .cviviiririvissimisiissminsissimissiiiisasmoss isisisisommsifonsunsmosesas 47
Topic 3 Energy and fuels..........cccoooviiiiiiniiiiieiiiiiiincieeeninneeeeenneenen. 52
(Wo) 7 = gT=T @ | OPRR 52
UNIT 10 FUBIS...ooseeeesissimsnmsmmssmnmsnnseciinnsamnmnsissisiivisisesivesssbesssssnssnsnnnnses 56
Unit 11 End of term 1 assessment 1eSt.....cooovvveeiiviniiiiiiiiiinnnns 61
fe] o [od J = [=Tox { {o] o 11 ox. 300 65
UNit 12 EIECITONICS eevee eee 65
UNIT 13 FOICES...uiiiiiiiiiiiiieeeeeee cece essere 77
Topic 5 Design and technology ........cccccceeiiiiiiiiirimninnnnnnnnennennnnn.. 83
Unit 14 Elements of design .......cccevvveviiiiviiiiininiieccieeceeeee, 83
Le] 1 (og J04 Le | {= RRR 21
Unit 15 Properties Of WAer uuu, 21
Unit 16 Sources Of WOHET ....c.ccsmsisimsimisiismsanresiiverssssssevesrssses 98

Unit 17 Water and the environment........... nm maces RA ARR 103


--- Page 6 ---
Topic 7 Weather and climate...........ccooreeericiiiriiiecceeeenens 108

Unit 18 Weather elements cvs mnssamsissississs 108
Unit 19 Weather and climate hazards ..........cccveeeeveeeenveeennee. 113
Topic 8 Landforms and MAPS .......ccoevvrrrrreeeriieeeeeeereeseseseseeesenns 117
Unit 20 Types of Landforms..........eeeeveeeecvveeveeeerereerneeeeeeeeseenns 117
Unit 21 End of term 2 assessment test ......oovceiiiinceinicinieenns 123
Topic 9 Soil, plants and animails.............cccoeeieeeriiininnnnnneeeeennnn. 126
UNIT 22 SOI cities essere sates 126
UNit 23 PINTS coerce esses ssnee essence sss mnnees 133
Unit 24 ANIMALS .vovisvmnssinnmmmosrsisisisiimsmmsisssissismsnisssrssssonssvosinses 137
Topic 10 Sustainable resource management ....................... 145
Unit 25 Sustainable resource management ........................ 145
Unit 26 Sources of Waste.......coveverreeeceeeieeiccceeeeeeeee eens 151

Unit 27 End of year assessment 1st .......uuvvvvieeeeeieveeeeeeceneennns 155


--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1.1 Keeping healthy

Introduction

Our body is made up of different parts. Our body let us do many activities. We must
take care of our body to keep it healthy. Following safety rules help to prevent
accidents that may cause harm to the body.

CUnit1 The human body

Objectives

You should be able to:
. list body parts
. describe how to take care of the body parts
. state toiletries and cosmetics used to take care of the body
. design cleaning equipment

make cleaning equipment
manipulate toiletries, cosmetics and equipment that are used in personal
hygiene.



--- Page 8 ---
Flashback ¢ Key words

Do you know a song or a rhyme
about the parts of the body? For

personal hygiene germs
cleaning equipment toiletries

example, there is a rhyme called cosmetics disinfectant soap

“Head and Shoulders”. In pairs,
recite the rhyme with your friend.

The parts of the body

Our body is made up of many different parts. Each part of the body has a use. For
example, we use our hands to hold things and we use our legs to walk. Figure 1.2.
shows the parts of the body.

; ear
eye ) tee
nose f
mouth
neck shoulder
chest armpit
arm
stomach
//
pubic area

Figure 1.2 Parts of the body


--- Page 9 ---
Activity 1

Read each of the labels in Figure 1.2 and look where each label points to on
the picture.

Point to each of the same parts on your own body and say their names
one-by-one like this:

“This is my head"

“This is my nose”

“These are my eyes”, and so on.

Exercise A

Look at the parts of the body.
b)

J

NUAY I
San

e)
In

Name the part of the body shown in each picture.
Which of the parts are found on the head?

Which part of the body has fingers?

Which body part has teeth inside it?

Taking care of the parts of the body

We must take care of the parts of our body to keep them healthy. We must
keep our body clean. Keeping your body clean is called personal hygiene.


--- Page 10 ---
We use the following things to take care of our body:

* Cleaning equipment — tools to take care of parts of the body such as
toothbrushes and hair brushes

» Toiletries — substances to clean the parts of the body such as toothpaste and
soap

« Cosmetics — substances to make the body look or smell good as, hair food or
smell nice such as deodorant.

Teeth

We use our teeth to chew our food and to make sounds when we speak. We
must keep our teeth clean to keep them healthy.

What you need to care for your teeth

Figure 1.3 Toothpaste, a toothbrush and water

Always use your own toothbrush. Never use somebody else’s toothbrush. Never
let anybody else use your toothbrush. Sharing toothbrushes can spread germs
that can make you sick.

Brushing your teeth

* Clean your teeth at least twice a day.

* Wet your toothbrush with clean water and then put a
little toothpaste on it.

* Brush your teeth by gently moving your toothbrush in
tiny circles over your teeth and gums.

* Make sure you brush all the sides of your teeth, the tops,
sides, back and front.

* When you have finished, spit the toothpaste out.

¢ Rinse your mouth with clean water and spit again.

Figure 1.4 A girl brushing her teeth



--- Page 11 ---
Activity 2

Find out from your family what you can use to clean your teeth if you do not
have a toothbrush and toothpaste.
Collect the materials and bring them to school.

In groups, discuss the items you brought and how they are used.
Show how to clean teeth with these materials.
Show how to clean your teeth with a toothbrush and toothpaste.

Hair
We need to take care of our hair to keep it healthy, clean, neat and smelling
fresh.

What you need to take care of your hair

AC

PETROLEUM]

JELLY.

Figure 1.5 What you need to take care of your hair

Always use your own hairbrush or comb. Never let anybody else use your hair
brush or comb. Sharing hairbrushes and combs spreads germs and lice.


--- Page 12 ---
Washing

Wet your hair with clean water.

Add soap or shampoo and use your fingers to rub it into all of your hair.

Rinse all of the soap or shampoo out of your hair with clean water.

Dry your hair with a clean towel or let it dry in the air.

Oil your hair with a little petroleum jelly or hair food.

Brush or comb your hair so that it is neat.

Keep your hair short. If you have longer hair, keep it in a neat style like cornrows.

ee eo eo eo o [J [J

Figure 1.6 Taking care of your hair

Show your partner how you wash your hair and brush it by pretending to
use the following things:
water, soap, towel, brush.

Do you or anyone in your family oil their hair? Show how to do this.



--- Page 13 ---
Activity 4

1. Collect pictures from magazines and newspapers of the different toiletries

and cosmetics that people use to take care of their hair.
2. Discuss what each is used for.
3. Make a class collage and display it.

Hands

We use our hands to do a lot of things each day. We also touch a lot of things
with our hands each day. When we touch things with our hands, germs get onto
our hands. Germs can make us sick. You need fo take care of your hands to
keep them clean and prevent the spread of germs.

What you need to take care of your hands

4

PETROLEUM,
JELLY

Figure 1.7 What you need to take care of your hands

Use disinfectant soap because it will kill the germs on your hands. Use running
water. Running water washes the germs off your hands. If you do not have a tap
with running water, pour water over your hands from a jug, cup or bottle. Sharing
a bowl of water can spread germs that will make you sick.

Taking care of your hands

You must wash your hands every time:
» after you go to the toilet

» before you prepare food and drink.


--- Page 14 ---
Figure 1.8 Wash your hands with soap and running water

Activity 5

1. List the toiletries you need to wash your hands.
2. Show how to wash your hands with soap and running water from a tap or a

Jug.

Ears and eyes

We use our ears to hear. We use our eyes to see. You must care for your ears and
eyes to keep them healthy.

What you need to take care of your ears and eyes

Figure 1.9 What you need to take care of your ears and eyes

Never put anything inside your ears or your eyes. Do not use earbuds to clean
your ears. They can damage your ear and cause you to lose your hearing.


--- Page 15 ---
Figure 1.10 Do not use earbuds to clean your ears

Taking care of your ears and eyes

Wash your ears and face at least twice a day.

Wet a facecloth with clean water and rub soap onto it.

Use the facecloth to gently wash your face and ears.

Wash the outside of your ears, and behind your ears.

Close your eyes and gently wipe the dirt off the skin around your eyes. Do not
get the soap in your eyes because it will sting.

Rinse all the soap off the facecloth with clean water.

Use the facecloth to rinse all the soap off your ears and face.

Dry your face gently with a clean towel.

You can put petroleum jelly on your face after it is dry to keep your skin soft.

Figure 1.11 How to take care of your ears and eyes



--- Page 16 ---
Armpits and pubic area

We need to keep our armpits and pubic areas clean so that they are healthy.
You must wash your armpits and pubic area every day. Use a facecloth, soap
and clean water to carefully wash them. Rinse them with clean water and dry
them with a clean towel. You can apply deodorant in your armpits. Wear clean
underwear and clothes each day.

Nose

We use our noses to smell. Our noses also help to
stop dirt and germs from the air getting into our
body. When we breathe in, dirt and germs get
stuck in the sticky mucus inside our noses. If you
need to clear the mucus from your nose, you
should use a handkerchief or tissue to blow

your nose. Put the tissue over your nose, close
your mouth and gently blow out through your
nose. Throw the tissue away in the dustbin when
you are finished.

Figure 1.12 Always use a handkerchief or tissue to blow your nose
Activity 6

1. Do arole play to show how to do the following things:
* clean your ears
* clean your eyes
* clean your armpits.
2. Discuss why we should not use earbuds to clean our ears.

Activity 7

Draw one of the following pieces of equipment: toothbrush, nail brush, hair comb
Make a model of the piece of equipment you have chosen. Use whatever
materials are available.

Show how to use your piece of equipment using your model.

Exercise B

Which body part is used to smell and breathe?

A. eye B. ear C. mouth D. nose
We brush our teeth using .

A. a towel B. a toothbrush C. a nail clipper D. soap



--- Page 17 ---
Which body part has an elbow?

A. arm B. leg C. neck D. foot

Which of the following should be used to clean our ears?
A. water B. cotton buds C. toothpick D. toothpaste
We do not share our combs, toothbrush, towel and hairbrushes because ___.
A. they are new

B. it spreads germs

C. they will wear out

D. they are not clean.

Name all the parts of the body that you take care of with the following
toiletries:

Toiletry Parts of the body

7. List the equipment and toiletries you need to take care of your hair.

8. What do you use to clean your teeth?

9. Explain why you should wash your hands every time after you go to the
toilet?

10. Explain why it is important to use a tissue when you blow your nose.

Summary
* The body is made up of many different parts. Parts of the body have different
functions.

* We must take care of the parts of our body to keep them clean and healthy.
* We use different equipment, toiletries and cosmetics to take care of the body.



--- Page 18 ---
Unit2 | Nutrition

Objectives

You should be able to:

1. name sources of food

2. classify foods according to their sources
3. state the importance of food to the body.

Flashback @ Key words

People eat food so that they can SA source grains cereal

grow up and be strong and healthy. crops flesh energy-giving
foods body-building foods
protective foods vegetables

Sources of food

People eat different types of food. Different foods come from different sources.
A source is where something comes from. Some foods come from plants and
some foods come from animals.

Figure 1.13 Some foods come from plants and some foods come from animals


--- Page 19 ---
Activity 8

1. Make a list of the types of food you eat every day at home and at school.

2. Now list the same foods under the following headings:

Foods that come from plants Foods that come from animals.

Foods from plants

People eat many different foods that come from plants. Foods that come from
plants include: grains, vegetables and fruits.

Grains

Grains are small seeds found on some types of plants. The plants we get grains
from are called cereal crops. Examples of cereal crops are maize, wheat and
sorghum.

Uses of maize grains

We can dry grains and store them for a long time. We can grind dried grains to
make meal or flour. Many people all around the world eat grains every day.

mealie cob

sadzai/istshwala

Figure 1.14 Ways we use maize grains

mealie meal

Use of wheat grains
We can dry wheat grains to form whole wheat. We can grind dried wheat fo form
flour. We can use wheat flour to make bread or other baked foods.

wheat seeds AN

Figure 1.15 Ways we use wheat grains wheat flour



--- Page 20 ---
Vegetables

Vegetables are foods that come from the roots, stems or leaves of plants. Figure

1.16 shows some examples of vegetables.

: carrot
spinach

Figure 1.16 Examples of vegetables

potatoes

Fruits

Fruits are foods that come from the part of the plant that makes seeds. That is why
there are seeds inside fruits. Some examples of fruits are apples, bananas and

tomatoes. Tomatoes are often called vegetables, but they are really fruits. Figure
1.17 shows some examples of fruits.

@ 3 J apples SR & 5)

tomatoes

Figure 1.17 Examples of fruits
Activity 9

1. Collect foods that come from plants.

2. Group the foods as either grains, fruits or vegetables.
3. Display them in your science corner.

Foods from animals

People eat many different foods that come from animals. Foods that come from
animals include meat, milk and eggs.

Meat

Meat comes from animals such as chickens, cattle, pigs, sheep, goats and fish.
The meat from cattle is called beef. The meat from pigs is called pork. The meat


--- Page 21 ---
from adult sheep is called mutton. The meat from young sheep is called lamb. The
meat from goats is called chevon.

beef

chicken

leg of lamb

fish

Figure 1.18 Examples of meat
Milk

Babies drink their mother's breastmilk. Children and adults drink milk from cows
and goats. We use milk to make other foods such as sour milk, cheese, butter and

yoghurt.
Bc ~ fio spe, Ly

\ NZ Pp] ’ . BH .
| Cnos V3 oa CO A
Sok CES

mother breastfeeding
) Ne! WY

pa

/

cheese yoghurt margarine

sour milk

Figure 1.20 Foods made from milk

Eggs
Eggs come from female chickens, called hens. A hen usually lays one €99 per

day.


--- Page 22 ---
Figure 1.21 Eggs

1. Make a clay or papier mache” model of an animal that gives you food.
2. What foods do you get from each animal you have modelled?

. Which food comes from a plant?

A. egg B. milk C. maize D. meat
. The following are grains except

A. wheat B. maize C. tomato D. sorghum
. Find a fruit from the list below.

A. onion B. mango C. pork D. beans

is a vegetable.

A. maize B. paw-paw C. banana D. carrot
. Babies need to grow well.

A.food B. mother's milk  C. vegetables D. fruit

Complete the following Srruving types of food and their sources.
Type of food .



--- Page 23 ---
The importance of food

Food gives our body energy, builds our body and protects against diseases.
Different foods give our body different things. This is why it is important to eat a
variety of foods each day.

Energy-giving foods

Some foods are energy-giving foods. They give our bodies energy to be able to
do things like walk, run, play sports, do schoolwork and have fun with our friends.
Examples of energy-giving foods are bread, potatoes, mealies and sadza.

Ps)

Figure 1.22 Energy-giving foods

Body-building foods

Some foods are body-building foods. They give our bodies the things it needs to
grow and be strong. Examples of body-building foods are eggs, meat, chicken,
fish, beans and nuts.

®© -

Figure 1.23 Body-building foods



--- Page 24 ---
Protective foods

Some foods are protective foods. They help our bodies to fight disease and stay
healthy. Examples of protective foods are vegetables and fruits. We should try to
eat vegetables and fruits every day.

Figure 1.24 Protective foods
Activity 11

Collect pictures of foods.

Divide the class in groups of five.

The teacher pulls out the picture.

The groups point out which type of food is shown. The groups that has more
points wins. :

Make a list of the types of food that you eat every day at home and school.
Does your list have foods that give you energy, build your body and protect
against disease?

Exercise D

. Which of the following food gives us lots of energy?

A. beans B. potatoes C. cabbages D. bananas
. Fruits and vegetables .

A. give us energy

B. help us to grow

C. make us walk

D. protect us from diseases
. is a body-building food.

A.Bread B. Banana C. Beans D. Potatoes
. We get the following from animals except .

A. meat B. milk C. meadlie meal D. eggs
. is a protective food.

A.Egg B. Orange C. Meat D. Milk



--- Page 25 ---
6.
7.
8.
9.
1

apd

Name two types of food that we can get from plants.

Name two types of food that we get from animals.

Give an example of food that we can eat in order to get energy.
Why is it important for us to eat a lot of fruits and vegetables?

0. Why should we eat eggs, beans and meat?

Summary

* Some foods come from plants and some foods come from animals.

» Foods from plants include grains, vegetables and fruits.

* Foods from animals include meat, eggs and milk.

« Food gives our bodies energy, builds our bodies and protects against diseases.

Energy-giving foods such as bread, potatoes, mealies and sadza give us lots
of energy to do things.

Body-building foods such as eggs, meat, chicken, fish, beans and nuts help
our bodies to grow and be strong.

Protective foods such as fruits and vegetables protect our bodies from diseases.


--- Page 26 ---
Unit 3 Diseases and prevention

Objectives

You should be able to:
identify causes of diseases
list organisms that cause diseases
discuss diseases caused by organisms
demonstrate how germs can be prevented from spreading
discuss the causes of diarrhoea
suggest ways of preventing diarrhoea
describe preparations of Oral Rehydration Solution treatment.

Flashback Se Key words

: erms disease microscope
Have you ever been sick? How 9

A vaccine diarrhoea stools
did it feel? Do you know what mosquito net oral rehydration
made you sick?

solution

What causes diseases?

Germs cause diseases. Germs are very small living organisms that make you sick
if they get into your body. A disease is a sickness such as flue.

Germs are so small that you cannot see them with your eyes. You need a
microscope to see germs. A microscope is a piece of equipment that makes small
things look big.

Figure 1.25 Using a microscope


--- Page 27 ---
How germs spread

Germs can spread from one person to another. Look at Table 1.1. It shows the
four main ways that germs spread:

Table 1.1

» By air. When a sick person sneezes or coughs,
germs spread into the air around them. If another
person breathes in the germs from the air, they
will get sick too.

By contact. If you touch something that has
germs on it, the germs will spread to your
hands. This can happen when you go to the
toilet or shake someone's hand. If you then
touch your food, the germs will spread

from your hand onto your food. When you
eat the food, the germs get into your body
and can make you sick.

By food and water. Germs can live in water
and food. If you drink dirty water or eat
food with germs in it, the germs will get into
your body and make you sick.

By insect or animal bites. Insects and animals
carry germs. If insects or animals bite you,

they can spread the germs food to your body.
If insects such as flies land on your food, they
can spread germs to your food.



--- Page 28 ---
Types of germs

There are four main types of germs: bacteria, viruses, protozoa and fungi. Figure
1.26 shows what they look like when you look at them with a microscope.

Bacteria

fungi

virus

Figure 1.26 The four main types of germs protozoa

Diseases caused by different germs

The table below shows some of the diseases caused by the different types of
germs.

Type of germ Examples of diseases
Dysentery, tuberculosis (TB), cholera, diarrhoea and typhoid

Common cold, influenza (flue), chicken pox, measles,
mumps and AIDS

Bacteria

Viruses

Protozoa Malaria, bilharzia and sleeping sickness

Fungi Ringworm and athlete's foot

Exercise E

. List the four types of germs.

. Name two diseases caused by viruses.
. List four ways that germs are spread.
. Which insect spreads malaria?

Preventing the spread of diseases

You have learnt that germs spread through the air, by contact, though food and
water and by insect and animal bites. Now you will find out how to prevent the
spread of germs. Table 1.2 shows ways to prevent.


--- Page 29 ---
Table 1.2
Preventing the spread of germs by air

« If you are sick, always cover your mouth
and nose with your elbow when you
sneeze or cough.

Preventing the spread of germs by contact

Wash your hands with soap and running
water after visiting the toilet.

Wash your hands with soap and running
water before you cook or eat food.
Keep the kitchen and kitchen utensils we
use clean all the time.

Preventing the spread of germs by food and water

+ Only drink clean safe water that has been
boiled or disinfected with bleach.

s



--- Page 30 ---
Preventing the spread of germs by insect or animal bites

* Sleep under a mosquito net at night to prevent
mosquitoes from biting you. Mosquitoes carry
germs that cause malaria and other diseases.

Activity 12

With your teacher's help, do this experiment in a group to see how far germs can
spread when you shake hands with a person. In the experiment, use some flour to
represent germs that we usually cannot see.

1. Stand in asingle line.

2. Let the first person in the line put the palm and fingers of their hand in a bowl of

flour.
Look at their hand. How much flour does it have on it?
| Now let the person shake hands with the next person in the line like in Figure 1.27.
Look at the second person’s hand. How much flour does it have on it?
How many people along the line do you think the flour germs could spread to?
Let the second person shake hands with the third and so on to the end of the
line.
Look at each person's hand. How many people did the
flour spread to?
What happens to the flour if you touch other things
like your desk, or your face?
. What would happen to the flour if you ate your food
with the flour on your hands?

No UAW

Figure 1.27

Activity 12 shows that:

* germs spread easily from one person to another and onto things that you touch
* germs on your hands can get onto your food and into your body if you do not
wash your hands before you eat.

Diarrhoea

Diarrhoea is when you pass watery stools many times than you normally do.


--- Page 31 ---
Causes of diarrhoea
Diarrhoea is caused by germs, such as bacteria or viruses.

Many of the germs that cause diarrhoea are spread by drinking water with
germs in it or eating food that has germs on it.

Preventing diarrhoea

We can prevent diarrhoea by preventing germs from getting info water or food
by doing the following things:

» Only drink water that is clean and safe. Figure 1.32 show how you can kill the
germs in water and make it safe to drink. Always ask an adult to help you if you
need to make water safe to drink.

Figure 1.28 Ways to kill the germs in water

Ways to kill germs in water

Boil water for ten minutes.

Add 1 teaspoon of bleach to 25 litres of water.

Stir and let it stand for 2 hours.

Make sure the water is covered.

Put water in a clear plastic bottle, close the lid and leave in the sun for é hours.

« Wash your hands after you go to the toilet and before you eat. When you use
the toilet, some germs may get on your hands. If you do not wash your hands,
the germs can get onto anything you touch, such as your face or your food.
Then the germs can get into your body and make you sick. Wash your hands
with clean running water and disinfectant soap.

* Wash vegetables and fruit before you cook or eat them. They can have germs
on them from the soil and from people who have touched them.


--- Page 32 ---
* Only eat food that is properly cooked and while it is still hot. Cooking kills germs
in food.

* Cover food to prevent flies landing on it. Flies carry germs and spread them to
food if they land on it.

* Keep the toilet clean. Use clean water and disinfectant soap to clean the
toilet and the area around it.

* Keep the kitchen clean. Use clean water and disinfectant soap to clean the

kitchen surfaces and utensils.

. Figure 1.29 shows you how to wash your hands properly.

2. Practice the correct way to wash your hands by copying the pictures and
pretending you are washing your hands with soap and clean running water.

3. Show how to wash your hands using clean running water and disinfectant soap. If

you do not have running water, ask a fiend to pour clean water over your hands

while you wash them.

How to treat diarrhoea

Diarrhoea makes you lose a lot of water from your body through your watery
stools.

If you lose more water than you drink, your body will get dehydrated. If you get
dehydrated, you can get very sick and you may even die.

The best way to prevent dehydration is to give a person with diarrhoea oral
rehydration solution (ORS) to drink. ORS is a mixture of clean boiled water, sugar
and salt that can be made at home. ORS should be taken within 24 hours.

Preparing the oral rehydration solution (ORS)

1. Put one litre of clean boiled water in a container.

2. Add six level teaspoons of sugar to the water.

3. Add a hdlf level teaspoon of salt to the water.

4. Stir the mixture until all the sugar and salt have dissolved.


--- Page 33 ---
5. Let the person with diarrhoea drink a cup of the ORS every
time after they go to the toilet until the diarrhoea stops.

6 level teaspoons of sugar

1 litre of water

Figure 1.30 How to make oral rehydration solution (ORS)

Activity 14

1. With your teacher's help in your groups, prepare oral rehydration solution (ORS).
2. Write down the steps for making the ORS.

. Diseases are caused by

A. plants B. wind C. dirt D. germs
2. Flue is caused by a .
A. protozoa B. bacteria C. fungi D. virus

3. We can prevent spreading germs when we sneeze or cough by

A. sleeping under a mosquito net

B. washing our hands

C.cleaning the kitchen

D. covering our mouth and nose with our elbow
4. A person suffering from diarrhoea is given to prevent dehydration.
A. salt B. water C. sugar D. oral rehydrating solution
Name four types of germs that can cause illness.
Name one disease that you know that is spread by mosquitoes.
. Why is it important for you to wash your hands before eating?
Name two ways to make water safe to drink.
. When making the oral rehydration solution, you should mix ___ level teaspoons
of sugar and ___ teaspoon of salt and _ of boiled water.

10. Ringworm is caused by

© ®No



--- Page 34 ---
Summary

Germs are very small living organisms.

Germs causes diseases.

A disease is a sickness.

Germs can spread through many ways.

Types of germs are viruses, bacteria, protozoa and fungi.

We can prevent the spread of diseases

Diarrhoea is caused by germs.

We can prevent the spread of diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea can cause dehydration which is very dangerous.

Dehydration can be prevented by drinking oral rehydration solution (ORS).


--- Page 35 ---
Unit 4 | Safety

Objectives

You should be able to:

1. state accidents that happen in the laboratory

2. identify objects that cause accidents in the laboratory

3. describe substances that cause accidents in the laboratory
4. list laboratory safety rules.

Flashback Po Key words

Do you have a laboratory at olor sponist
; laboratory equipment toxic
your school? Figure 1.31 shows a La

school laboratory. Discuss what
you see.

Figure 1.31 A school laboratory

Accidents in the laboratory

A laboratory is a room where we can do scientific experiments. An experiment is
a scientific way of finding something out.



--- Page 36 ---
The laboratory equipment and substances in a laboratory can be dangerous. If we
are not careful, we can cause accidents in a laboratory. Laboratory equipment
are utensils and machines used to conduct experiments.

Equipment that can cause accidents in the laboratory

There is glass equipment, gas burners and electrical plugs and wires in a laboratory.
These can all be very dangerous.

Figure 1.32 show accidents that can happen when we use some of the equipment
in the laboratory. Discuss how you think each accident happened.

[|
UL

Figure 1.32 Equipment that can cause accidents in the laboratory

Substances that can cause accidents

There are many gases and chemicals in the laboratory. Many of them are toxic. They
can make us very sick if we breathe them in, touch them or swallow them. Figure 1.33
shows accidents with substancesin the laboratory. Discuss how you think each accident
happened.

Figure 1.33 Substances that can cause accidents in the laboratory


--- Page 37 ---
Laboratory safety rules
We can prevent accidents in the laboratory by following these safety rules:

Do not run around.

Follow the instructions your teacher gives you.

Be careful when you handle glass equipment.

Be careful when you use a gas burner.

Do not touch electrical plugs and wires.

Do not sniff, touch or taste chemicals.

Do not eat or drink in the laboratory.

Always wear closed shoes.

Wear safety goggles to protect your eyes.

Wear a laboratory coat to protect your skin and clothes.
Wear safety gloves to protect your hands.

Keep the windows open for fresh air.

Wash your hands when you leave the laboratory and before you eat.

Figure 1.34 Wear safety clothing

Exercise G

. The following are accidents that occur in a laboratory except .
A.burmns ~~ B. pojsoning C. drowning D. electric shock

. Aninstrument used to heat chemicals in a laboratory is called a
A.gas tank ~~ B. gas burner C. tripod D. fire extinguisher

. The following protective clothing should be worn in the laboratory except

A. laboratory coat B. safety glasses
C. gloves D. apron

. An instrument used to put out fires in a laboratory is called a .
A. gas tank  B. gas burner C. tripod D. fire extinguisher



--- Page 38 ---
. We do not smell chemicals because they could be

A. burning B. toxic C. blue D. yellow
. Which two accidents can occur in the laboratory?

. Why should you never eat or drink while in a laboratory?

. Are the following statements true or false?

a) Never put any chemical close to your nose in order to smell it while in a
laboratory. True/False

b) Itis not important to always follow instructions while in the laboratory. True/
False

c) Itis important to wear safety goggles while working with chemicals in the
laboratory. True/False.

Summary

* Alaboratory is a room where we can do scientific experiments.

* The equipment and substances in a laboratory can be dangerous.
* Equipment in the laboratory can cause accidents in the laboratory.
* Substances in a laboratory can cause accidents.

We can prevent accidents in the laboratory by following the safety rules.

Glossary

bleach a chemical used to whiten or sterilise materials/

substances

chemical a man-made substance to carry out a purpose
chew bite and work food with teeth in the mouth
hairfood a substance used in taking care of hair

gas a fuel that can easily light up/heat up things
pretending to show a specific action/to make it appear as

doing a specific action

rinse wash something with clean water to remove soap.

detergent, dirt or any impurities

substances a material of a particular kind

End of topic assessment test

Multiple Choice

. Which of these is a part of the leg?

A. wrist B. shoulder C. knee D. elbow

. Which piece of equipment do we use to take care of our teeth?

A. stick B. comb C. soap D. toothbrush

. Which of the following types of food will protect you from diseases?

A. fruits B. sugar C. soft drink D. mahewu


--- Page 39 ---
is a type of germ that can cause diseases.
A. Fly B. Mosquito C. Bacteria D. Bird
. Which of the following is not included in the oral rehydration solution?
A.sadza B. salt C. sugar D. water
Which of the following drinks should be given to a person suffering from
diarrhoea?
A. oral rehydration solution C. sugar solution
B. fruit juice D. salt solution
We prevent malaria by
A. cleaning toilets
B. washing our hands
D. covering with mosquito nets when we sleep
D. boiling water
can cause accidents in the laboratory.
A. Walking B. Seating C. Eating D. Talking
Which of the following is an energy giving food?
A. apple B. potato C. lemon D. beef
. Which of the following disease is caused by a virus?
A. malaria B. flu C. tuberculosis  D. diarrhoea

Structured questions

State whether the following statements are true or false.
a) We can get energy to do well in sports if we eat sadza and bread. True/
False
It is necessary to wash one's hands before eating. True/False.
Flies can spread germs. True/False
People suffering from diarrhoea should be given the oral rehydration
solution. True/False
) The oral rehydration solution can be made from soup, salt and sugar.
True/False (5)
Why should you wash your hands before eating anything? (1)
Why should you never eat or drink anything while you are in the laboratory? (1)
Fill in the following sentences using the given answers. (mutton, virus, cereals)
A. Grains are also called
B. We get from sheep.
C. A causes flu. (3)



--- Page 40 ---
Figure 2.1 We use different materials to make tools and structures

Introduction

We use different materials to make things. Some materials are mined from the
ground and some are made by people. Materials are used to make tools and
structures that make our lives easier.

C Unit5 | Characteristics of materials

Objective

You should be able to:
1. distinguish between natural and man-made materials.

Look around you in the . .
material natural material
matter man-made material

classroom. What things can you
see? Can you see chairs, tables
and books? What are each of
these objects made of?



--- Page 41 ---
Natural and man-made materials

Everything is made of some type of material. A material is the type of matter that
an object is made of. For example, a book is made of paper. A chair could be
made of wood, metal or plastic. Matter is anything that takes up space and mass.

We can group materials into two groups based on where they come from: natural
materials and man-made materials.

e Natural materials are materials that come from the environment. Examples
of natural materials are sand, rock, leather, chalk, oil, gold, cotton, coal and
wood.

« Man-made materials are materials that are made by people. Examples of
man-made materials are paper, glass, steel, plastic, concrete, synthetic rubber,
rayon, nylon and polyester.

Look at Figure 2.2. It shows objects made of natural materials and objects made

of man-made materials.

Natural Man-made

Figure 2.2 Natural and man-made materials
Activity 1

In groups, collect objects made of different materials found inside and outside
the classroom.
1. Make a list of all the objects that you collected.
2. Write the name of the materials each object is made of next to the name of
the object in your list.
Group the objects made of natural materials together.

3.

4. Group the objects made of man-made materials together.

5. If an object is made of both natural and man-made materials?
Write both of the materials.



--- Page 42 ---
Exercise A

. The following are man-made materials except .
A.paper
B. glass
C.soil
D.shoes

. Which of the following is made from a natural material?

A. chalkboard

B. wooden spoon

C.plate

D.pot
. What are man-made materials?
. Give three examples of man-made materials.
. Name three natural materials.

Summary

e Natural materials come from the environment.
* Man-made materials are made by people.


--- Page 43 ---
(Unité Elements, mixtures and compounds

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. differentiate pure and impure materials
2. demonstrate how to purify water.

Flashback Le Key words

What do we do to water at home substances mixtures pure

before we can drink it? Why do you materials impure materials
think we do this to the water? distilled water filtration filter

Pure and impure materials

You have learnt how we can group materials as natural or man-made materials
by where they come from.

We can also group materials info two groups by how many substances they are
made up of.

Pure materials are materials that are made up of only one substance. For
example, distilled water is pure because it contains only water and no other
substances. Examples of pure substances are distilled water, paraffin, petrol,
sugar, salt, gold, iron and oxygen gas.

* Impure materials are materials that contain more than one substance. For
example, if we add sugar to distilled water, the water is no longer pure. The
water is impure because it is now made of two substances, water and sugar.
Examples of impure substances are mixtures of water and sugar, water and
salt, salt and sugar and sand and salt.

impure

Pure

i}

—

Figure 2.3 Pure material and an impure material


--- Page 44 ---
Purifying water

Water usually has lots of substances inside it, even if it looks clean. So water is
impure, unless it is distilled water.

To make water pure, we need to remove all the substances from the water. Two
ways to purify water are: filtration and distillation.

Filtration

Filtration is a process of removing solid things like sand or leaves from impure water.
We pour the impure water though a filter. The filter is a material with small holes in
it. The water can pass through the holes but the larger solid things cannot. The filter
catches the solid things but lets the water flow through it.

Activity 2

In this activity you will remove sand from water by filtration.
You will need: water with sand in it, a beaker, a funnel, filter paper and a flask.

What you must do:

1. Your teacher will show you how to fold a piece of filter paper.

2. Put the folded filter paper into the funnel. Put the funnel into the opening of
the flask as in Figure 2.4.

3. Use the beaker to slowly pour the sandy water into the funnel.

impure water

filter paper

clear water

Figure 2.4 A water filter

4. What did the water look like before you poured in into the funnel?
5. What did the water look like after it had passed through the filter paper into the
flask?



--- Page 45 ---
6. What was left on the filter paper after you poured the water though it?
7. Do you think the water that passed through the filter paper was pure?

Distillation

The water that passed through the filter paper in Activity 2 is still not pure. Even if
it looks pure, the water contains substances such as salt that are too small to see
and too small to remove with a filter.

The way to remove these very small substances is by distillation. Distillation is a
process of removing substances from impure water by heating and then cooling
the water.

Activity 3

In this activity you will remove salt from water by distillation.

You will need: a heat source such as a Bunsen burner, a solution of salt and

water, a distillation flask, a thermometer, condenser, rubber tubing, cool water,

a flask, glass connectors and a rubber stopper.

What you must do:

1. Your teacher will set up the distillation equipment as you
can see in Figure 2.5

2. Watch what happens as the salty water in the distillation
flask heats up.

3. Can you see droplets of water inside the condenser? |

4. What comes out of the bottom of the condenser?

5. What is left in the distillation flask?

Thermometre

distillation
flask

collecting flask

Figure 2.5: How to purify water by distillation

When we heat the salty water, the water turns into steam. The salt cannot turn into
steam. The steam rises up and moves into the condenser. The condenser is cool
because of the cooling water passes around it. When the steam cools down in the
condenser, it turns into pure water. The drops of water run down into the collecting
flask. The water in the collecting flask is pure water. The salt is left behind in the
distillation flask at the end of the experiment.


--- Page 46 ---
Exercise B

. The process of heating and coolingimpure water to get pure wateriscalled___
A. pouring B. filtration C. distillation D. solution

. Which of the following is an impure material?
A. distilled water B. paraffin C.sugarwater  D. petrol

. We can make a material impure by another material.
A.removing B. adding C. heating D. serving

. The process of removing sand from sandy water is called ____.

A. pouring B. filtration C. solution D. purification
. The following are impure materials except .

A. muddy water B. sugar solution  C. gold D. salt solution
. What is a pure material?
. If you add sugar to salt is the salt still pure?
. Explain how filtration removes large solid substances from water.

Summary

* Pure materials are made up of only one substance.

* Impure materials are made up of more than one substance.

* We can remove the solid substances from water by the process of filtration.

We can purify water by the process of distillation.


--- Page 47 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:

1. classify tools from home

2. design tools of your own choice

3. construct artefacts from sketches of tools.

Flashback y Key words
Imagine if your teacher asks you 7 * tools kitchen fools
to go and get sand from the garden tools building
playground. Which tools would you fools design model
use to dig the sand out of the garden

and bring it fo the classroom?

Types of tools

Tools are pieces of equipment that we use to make our work easier. Can you
imagine how difficult it would be to dig in the garden only with your fingers? It
would be very difficult. It is much easier to dig soil with a tool such as a spade or
a hoe.

Figure 2.6 Digging with a hoe makes work easier

There are many tools that people use at home and at work. Think of the tools you
use each day. We can group tools based on where we use them: garden tools,
kitchen tools and building tools.

Safety: Always be careful when you use tools at home or at school. Some of the
tools are sharp and they can injure you.



--- Page 48 ---
Kitchen tools

Kitchen tools are tools we use in the kitchen for preparing and eating food. The
table below shows some kitchen tools and what they are used for.

Table 2.1 Kitchen tools and their uses

For cutting food For cooking
food

For stirring food For holding
and drinks drinks

For eating food

For eating food For holding
food

Activity 4
1. List the kitchen tools that you use each day.

2. Describe what you use each tool for.
3. State what material each tool is made of.



--- Page 49 ---
Garden tools

Garden tools are tools we use in the garden to make our work easier. Look at the
table below which shows some examples of garden tools.

Table 2.2 Garden tools and their uses

Garden tool Garden tool
Hoe For digging For digging small
holes for planting

For removing small plants
weeds

For digging large | Fork For turning the soil

holes .
For breaking

For moving soil down lumps of
soll

For leveling beds | Watering can For watering

. plants
For removing cut

grass

Activity 5

1. List three garden tools used for digging.
2. Describe what a watering can is used for.
3. State what materials each tool is made of.



--- Page 50 ---
Building tools

Building tools are tools we use to make work easier building things like houses.
Have you seen people building a house? What tools did they use? Look at the
examples of building tools in the table below.

Table 2.3 Building tools and their uses

Building tool Building tool

Hammer To hit nails Wheelbarrow To carry heavy
into wood things

To cut wood

Lifting stones | Spirit level To show if

out of the soil the surface is
for loosening levelled

hard soil

Activity 6

1. Collect as many pictures of tools as you can from home and school.
2. Name the tools.
3. Group the tools together as either kitchen, garden or building tools.



--- Page 51 ---
Design a tool

To design something is a process of planning and drawing a thing that we want
to make. Drawing helps us to work out how we will make a thing.

When we design something we need to think about:
« what we want to use it for

what materials we will use to make it

what size it will be

what we want it to look like

how the different parts fit together.

Figure 2.7 A sketch for a hammer

Activity 7

1. Choose a tool that you would like to make.

2. Write down what the tool is used for.

3. Draw a sketch of the tool.

4. On your sketch show what materials the tool is made of.

Make a model of a tool

We can make a model of a tool from our design sketches. Making a model helps
us to test a design using materials that are cheap and easy to find. A model is a
smaller version of the final tool.

Activity 8

Collect pictures of tools that were used by our ancestors. These tools are
called artefacts.

Sketch a design of the artefact you want to make.

Choose and collect materials that are easy to get to make a model of the
tool that you designed in Activity 7. You could use materials such as clay or
paper or cardboard to make the model.

With the help of your teacher, make a model of the tool.

What did you learn from making the model?

Would you change your design after making your model? Why?



--- Page 52 ---
Exercise C

. Tools make work

A. difficult B. easier C.slower D. faster

. The following are kitchen tools except

A. pot B.spade C.spoon D. plate

. A hoe is used for

A. cutting B. watering C. building D. digging

. The tool in the diagram is a tool.

A. cutting B. kitchen C. garden D. building

. A wheelbarrow is used for heavy things.

A. building B. cutting C. cooking D. carrying

. Tools used for preparing food are called tools.
. Tools are made from various materials. Write down the name of a kitchen tool

and state the materials it is made of.

. Draw the kitchen tool you described in question 7.

Summary

Tools are used to make work easier.

There are kitchen tools, garden tools and building tools.

When we design a tool, it helps to draw a sketch.

Making a model of a tool helps us to test a design using materials that are easy
and cheap to get.


--- Page 53 ---
Objective

You should be able to:
1. identify structures at home.

Flashback

What structures do you find
around your home? Discuss with
your friend.

) Key words

/ ¥ structure rural area

urban area

Structures at home

A structure is a building or an object that is made of different parts joined together.
Examples of structures are huts, houses, kraals and gazebos. Structures are made
accordi ng to the owner's needs.

Structures in rural areas

In rural areas, people grow their own food. Many of the structures in rural areas are
for farming, such as storing grain and keeping animals compared to urban areas.

Look at the table below. It shows examples of structures you may find in the rural
areas of Zimbabwe.

Table 2.4 Structures in rural areas

Structure Uses Structure
For living in | Dishrack



--- Page 54 ---
For storing For keeping
maize or cattle or
other grains Pr other animals

For keeping | Blair toilet For relieving
chickens or ow > yourself
other birds

Look at Figure 2.8. It shows a picture of a rural village in Zimbabwe.
Name the structures you can see.
What is each structure used for?
What materials are the structures
made of?

Figure 2.8 Structures in a rural village

Structures in urban areas

In urban areas, people do not grow their own food. Many of the structures in
urban homes are for storing things or for leisure activities. Urban areas have many
houses and buildings because many people live there.

Table 2.5 Structures in urban areas

Structure Structure



--- Page 55 ---
For storing Toolshed
motor ==
vehicles

Drawing structures at home

It is useful to draw the design of a structure before we try to build it. Drawing
helps us to understand things like:

* how the parts of the structure fit together

* what materials it is made up of

« what it will look like.

Activity 10

1. Choose a rural structure or an urban structure you are interested in.
2. Draw the structure.

3. On your drawing label what it is used for and the materials it is made of.

. Structures in rural areas are often related to .
A. farming B. travelling C. working D. sleeping

. The following structure is common in urban areas.
A. Blair toilet B. grain store C. garage D. kraal

. In the rural areas when we wash plates and dishes we dry them on a
A.metal sink  B. granary C. hut roof D. dish rack

. Give three structures found in rural areas. Ao

. Give three structures found in urban areas. ; Ne

. Name the structure in Figure 2.9.

. Draw the structure in Figure 2.9.

Figure 2.9



--- Page 56 ---
Summary

* A structure is a building or an object that is made of different parts joined
together.

» Structures are found in rural areas. =

e Structures are found in urban areas.

* [ft helps to draw a structure before we build it to plan how we will make it.

Glossary

artefacts an object made by humans in the past
distilled water pure water made by the process of distillation
leisure use of free time

sketch a rough drawing used to make a final product
substance a material from which something is made
condenser equipment used to cool water vapourdsteam

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

. Which one of the following materials is man-made?
A.wood B. cotton C. plastic D. soil
. Which one of the following materials is natural?
A. bread B. bottle C.car D. rock
. Which of the following materials is pure?
A. distilled water B. sugar and water solution
C. salt and water solution D. sugar and salt mixture
. If you mix water and sand, you can remove the sand using a method called __.
A. filtration B. mixing C. boiling D. heating
. A is used to make work easier.
A. structure  B. material C. tool D. design
. A spade is an example of a tool.
A.school B. garden C. kitchen D. building
. A spoon is used for ‘
A. stirring B. drinking C. digging D. building
. Which of the following tools is NOT used to dig soil?
A.hoe B. spade C. pick D. watering can
. Ahammeris used for ____.
A. turning screws B. watering vegetables
C.carmrying heavy things D. hitting nails
10. Which of the following is a structure?
A.plate B. wood C. garage D. metal



--- Page 57 ---
Structured questions

Is water a man-made or natural material?

What is the name of water that is pure?

Name the process by which impure water can be made pure.
Explain why we use tools.

Give three examples of building tools.

What is a structure?

Why are there different structures in rural areas and urban areas?
Name and draw a structure that is usually found in rural areas.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.



--- Page 58 ---
Figure 3.1 Energy is used to play and to prepare food.

Introduction
Energy is the ability to do work. We use energy to do many things like playing,
working, cooking, lighting and heating our homes. Fuels store energy. Fuels release

their stored energy when they are burned. There are solid, liquid and gas forms of
fuels. Some fuels are renewable; some are non-renewable.

(Unit 9) Energy

Objectives

You should be able to:
explain the meaning of energy

identify uses of energy

identify forms of fuel

demonstrate characteristics of fuels

classify fuels as renewable and non-renewable.



--- Page 59 ---
energy

What gives you energy to be able

Flashback @ Key words
7d

to work and play?

What is energy?

Energy is the ability to do work. For example, if a person has energy, they can
play and do work. When a plant has energy, it can produce seeds and fruit. If an
animal has energy, it can walk and run. If a machine has energy, it can move.
When a lamp has energy, it can shine.

Figure 3.2 Energy allows us to do things like play and work

Energy can pass from one object to another. For example, we get energy from the
food we eat. When you eat, energy from the food passes to your body. You can
then use the energy in your body to do things like kick a ball. When you kick the
ball, energy passes from your foot to the ball and makes the ball move.

Figure 3.3 Energy passes from the food to the boy and then to the ball



--- Page 60 ---
Uses of energy

We use energy for many activities in everyday life. Some of the main uses of energy
are:

* Growth: Our bodies use energy to grow and develop into adults.

* Movement: We use energy to move our bodies. This lefts us move from place to
place, play sport and dance.

* Work: We use energy to do work such as schoolwork and helping with tasks at
home and in the garden.

* Purifying water: We use energy to boil water.

* Cooking: We use energy to cook our food.

* lighting: We use energy to light our homes and classrooms.

* Heating: We use energy to warm our bodies and our homes and classrooms when
it is cold.

* Music: We use energy to make music.

* Machines: We use energy to make machines work.

Look at the pictures in Figure 3.4. Discuss what energy is being used for in each picture.

We use energy to play sport

We use energy to boil water and cook food We use energy to light our homes

We use energy to make music We use energy to make machines work

Figure 3.4 Some of the ways we use energy


--- Page 61 ---
Exercise A

1.

We get our energy from
A.light

B. heat

C.water

D. food

Energy is an object's ability to
A. do work

B. get smaller

C.cool down

D.do nothing

What makes machines work?
A.water

B. oil

C.sunlight

D.energy

Say whether the following statements are true or false.

a) Energy can pass from one object to another. True/False

b) Children who are playing games do not need energy. True/False
Complete the following statements

a) We use energy to (cook/cover) our food.

b) We need energy to (light/leave) our homes when it is dark.

c) We use energy to make (game/music) when we play the drums.

Summary

Energy is the ability to do work
Energy can be passed from one object to another
We use energy for many activities



--- Page 62 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:

1. identify forms of fuel

2. demonstrate characteristics of fuels

3. classify fuels as renewable and non-renewable.

Flash back [ Key words

Think of all the different materials / fuel solid fuel liquid fuel gas
that people can burn to cook their fuel renewable fuel
food. Discuss with a friend. non-renewable fuel biofuel

What is fuel?

A fuel is a material that burns fo release heat. Examples of fuels are wood, paraffin and
cooking gas. A fuel stores energy. When the fuel burns, the energy is given off as heat and
light. Figure 3.5 shows examples of fuels and how we use them when they bum.

Figure 3.5 Fuels burn and release heat and light which we can use. (a) Wood (b) Paraffin (¢) Cooking gas

Cacti 1

1. In groups collect fuels that we use to make fire at home and at school. You can
collect materials such as dry wood, dry grass, paper, coal and dried cow dung.

2. Go outside with your teacher and find a safe place to make a fire.

3. Follow your teacher and test each fuel to see how it burns. (Be very careful when
making fire. Make sure that the fire does not spread. Fire is very dangerous. Fire can

destroy property and even kill people.) )



--- Page 63 ---
Which of the fuels was easiest to light?
Which of the fuels burnt the fastest?

Which of the fuels burnt for the longest time?
Which of the fuels made the most smoke when burning?

No A

\

Ne

Forms of fuel
We can group fuels based on their physical properties as solid, liquid or gas fuels.

Solid fuels

Solid fuels are hard when you touch them. They cannot be poured from one
container to another. Examples of solid fuels are wood, dry grass, cow dung and
candle wax.

dried cow dung

candle

Figure 3.6 Examples of solid fuels.
Liquid fuels

Liquid fuels are like water because they can be poured from one container to
another. Examples of liquid fuels are paraffin, petrol and diesel.

Gas fuels

paraffin petrol
Gas fuels are like air. You cannot see them or touch them. Sometimes you can

Figure 3.7 Examples of liquid fuels



--- Page 64 ---
smell a gas. Gas fuels spread out to fill up a container. They are usually stored in
gas tanks. Examples of gas fuels are cooking gas and welding gas.

Figure 3.8 A cylinder of cooking gas connected to a gas stove

Gas tanks and cylinders are very dangerous. Do not play near them or tamper
with them. You could cause a fire or an explosion.

Renewable and non-renewable fuels

We get fuels from the environment around us. When we burn a fuel, it is used up.
We cannot use it again. We divide fuels into two groups based on how long they
take to be replaced in the environment: renewable and non-renewable fuels.

Renewable fuels

Renewable fuels are fuels that take quite a short time to be replaced in the
environment. Aslong as we do not use these fuels faster than they can be replaced,
we will not run out of them. For example, if we do not cut down trees for firewood
faster than new trees can grow to replace them, we will not run out of firewood.
Examples of renewable fuels are wood, vegetable oils from crops like sunflowers
and biofuels. Biofuels are renewable fuels made from plant or animal materials
from farms. For example, bioethanol is a biofuel that can be made from sugar or
starch from potatoes or maize. It can be used to replace petrol in motor engines.

Biofuel

=

maize

sugar cane

Figure 3.9 Biofuels and its sources


--- Page 65 ---
Non-renewable fuels

Non-renewable fuels are fuels that take so long to be replaced in the environment
that once we have used them all up, we will never have any more to use again.
Examples of these fuels include coal, crude oil and natural gas. These are called
fossil fuels. Petrol, diesel, paraffin and cooking gas all come from these fossil fuels.
Fossil fuels are fuels formed deep under the ground by natural processes that take

hundreds of thousands of years.

coal fossil fuel pafafin

Figure 3.10 Fossil fuels are non-renewable fuels
Exercise B
1. Fuel to release energy .

A. smells B. glows C. burns D. shines
2. Which of the following is a renewable fuel?

A. wood B. cooking gas C.candle wax  D. petrol
3. Which of the following is not a liquid fuel?

A. gas B. paraffin C. diesel D. petrol

4. What is a fuel?

5. Name the three forms of fuels.

6. Why do we say that wood is a renewable fuel?

7. Why will we eventually run out of non-renewable fuels?

Summary

+ Energy is the ability to do work.
* We get our energy from our food.

* We use energy to do many things like playing, working, cooking, lighting and

heating our homes.
+ Fuels store energy which is released when they are burned.
There are three forms of fuels: solid, liquid and gas fuels.

Examples of liquid fuels are paraffin, petrol and diesel.

Examples of solid fuels are wood, dry grass, dry cow dung and candle wax.


--- Page 66 ---
« Examples of gas fuels are cooking gas and welding gas.

*« Renewable fuels can be replaced quickly. Non-renewable fuels cannot be
replaced.

* Examples of renewable fuels are wood and biofuels such as bioethanol.
Examples of non-renewable fuels are fossil fuels such as coal, crude oil and gas.

Glossary

biofuel - renewable fuels made from plant or animal materials from
farms

energy - the property of an object that allows the object to do things

fuel - a material that burns to produce heat

renewable fuel - fuels that take quite a short time to be replaced in the
environment

non-renewable fuel - fuels that take so long to be replaced in the environment
that once we have used them all up, we will never have any
more to use again

End of topic assessment test
Multiple Choice

makes us able to run and work hard.
A.Energy B. Sleeping C. Clothes D. Shoes
2. Which is a renewable fuel?
A. diesel B. petrol C. wood D. cooking gas.
. These are all liquid fuels except for ____.
A. candle wax B. paraffin C. petrol D. diesel
. A material that burns to produce heat is called a
A. hot plate B. fuel C. stove D. fire
. is an example of a fuel that people can replace in a short of time.
A. Petrol B. Gas C. Bioethanol D. Diesel
. Which of the following is a property of a gas fuel?
A.you can see it B. you can smell it
C. you can touch it D. you can hear it
. These are all fossil fuels except .
A. bioethanol B. paraffin C. diesel D. petrol



--- Page 67 ---
. Fossil fuels are non-renewable fuels that

A. take a short time to form

B. take a long time to form

C.form in the air

D.form in the sea.

Which is an example of a solid fuel?

A.candle wax B. cooking gas C. paraffin D. diesel
. People get energy from .

A. air B. sunlight C. water D. food

Structured questions

What is energy? [2]

Name three uses we have for energy. [3]

What is a fuel? [2]

Name the three forms of fuels. [3]

What is the difference between renewable and non-renewable fuels? [2]

End of term 1 assessment test

Multiple choice

Answer all questions
Choose the correct answer.

The following are important parts of the human body except
A.head B. legs C. arms D. tail
Which part of your body do you use for seeing things?

A. mouth B. eyes C. nose D. tongue
Chipo said that the fruit she was eating was sweet. Which part of her body
did she use to find out whether the fruit was sweet?

A.eyes B. fingers C. tongue D. stomach
Farai's teeth are very clean. He uses a to clean his teeth.
A. handkerchief B. comb

C.toothbrush D. shoes

When washing our hands we should use .

A. detergent soap B. toothpaste

C.cosmetics D. petroleum jelly



--- Page 68 ---
A child suffering from diarrhoea should be given

A more sugar B. more salt

C.oral rehydration solution D. soft drink

Diseases are caused by :

A. food B. dirt

C.germs D. water

Eating fresh fruits and vegetables is good for you because they will
A. protect you from diseases

B. give you a lot of energy

C.make you grow very tall

D. make you grow very fat

Eating eggs, fish and meat will make you

A. grow

B. wise

C.clean

D.rich IN

. Which structure is common in rural areas?

A.kraal B. garage C. gazebo D. swimming pool
. We make chairs and tables from :

A. clay B. air C. water D. wood

. Which of the following, materials is not man-made?

A.stones B. chairs  C. tables D. books

. Which of the following materials is impure?

A. distilled water C. sandy water

C. petrol D. paraffin

. A material is said to be pure when

A.it is very clean

B. it is made up of one substance

C.it is very hot

D.it is very cold

. Which from the following is pure liquid?

A. distilled water

B. syrup drink

C.tea without milk

D. tea with milk

. Which method can be used to remove sand from muddy water?
A.distillation  B. heating C. filtration D. washing
. We can make water impure by

A. heating it ;

B. freezing it

C.cooling it

D. adding something to it

. The following are examples of natural materials except

A. soll B. minerals C. trees D. plastic



--- Page 69 ---
. Sarah has a bag which is very heavy. She wants to carry it from the bus stop
to their house. Which of the following tools should she use?

A.dish B. wheel barrow C. shovel D. hoe

. Tendai runs fast, He also plays football. He needs to perform well in
sport.

A.energy B. meat C. fruit D. tools

. A tool used to dig in the garden is a ;

A.hammer B. knife C. spade D. spoon

. Asaw is used to

A. cut food  B.cut wood C. stir food D. dig holes

. A material that can burn to produce heat is called a

A. fire B. wood C. paper D. fuel

. Which of the following fuels is a liquid?

A. coal B. wood C. paraffin D. cow dung

. The following are all non-renewable fuels except

A. wood B. petrol C. coal D. paraffin

Structured questions

a) A substance that burns and produces heat is called

b) Paraffin is a fuel that is in the form of a

c) Wood is a fuel that is.in the form of a

d) Foryou tobe able torun and performwellin sports youneedtohave .
e) Foods such as potatoes, bread and sadza will give you a lot of . [5]

Which of the following materials are pure or impure? Write pure or impure
after each material. ;

a) Distilled water

b) Paraffin

c) Tea with milk

d) Oral rehydration solution

e) Gold

a) Why do people use tools?
b) Where are the following tools used at home?
i. Pots [Mm
i. Garden fork [1]
ii. Watering can [1]
c) Why is it important fo wash hands before eating? [5]

a) Germs spread by mosquitoes cause a disease called [1]
b) A person suffering from should be given oral rehydration solution.



--- Page 70 ---
5,

c) When making oral rehydration solution;

a

i. how much boiled water do you need?

i. how much sugar do you need?

ii. how much salt do you need? [5]

Draw the diagram of a person (either a boy or a girl) and show the following
parts of the body.

i. head

i. legs

ji. arms

iv. eyes

v. mouth

b) Name the part of the body that we use to smell things.
c) Name the part of the body that we use to see things.



--- Page 71 ---
Figure 4.1 Electronic devices use electricity to work.

Infroduction

Electronic devices use electricity to work. Electricity is a form of energy. In Zimbabwe
we use electricity to power industries and factories. Electricity is hazardous, so we
must learn how to use electronic devices correctly. Force pulls certain materials to
it. Magnets attract certain materials but they do not attract certain materials.

(Unit 12] Electronics

Objectives

You should be able to:
identify electronic devices
use the devices correctly
recognize sources of electricity in Zimbabwe
identify dangers of electricity
suggest safety precautions when using electricity
identify conductors and insulators.



--- Page 72 ---
Flashback Word check

Have you ever watched a / electronic device electricity
program on a television? What

hydropower powerline
made the television work? thermal power electric
circuit plug switch battery
electric current

Electronic devices

Electronic devices are objects that use electricity to work, for example; a radio,
television and stove. Electricity is a form of energy.

Table 4.1 Electronic devices use electricity to work.

Television

Uses electricity to make moving pictures | Uses electricity to make sound.
and sound.

Cell phone Computer

Uses electricity from its battery to [Uses electricity to do calculations,
transmit sound. store information and show videos.



--- Page 73 ---
Electric light bulb Electric kettle

make light.

Electric stove

oo Uses electricity to keep food and
Uses electricity to heat food or water. drinks cold.

Look at Table 4.1. It shows some examples of electronic devices that we may
find at home or school.

1. Discuss the devices on Table 4.1.
2. Which ones have you seen?

3. Which ones have you used?

4. How do they work?

Using electronic devices

Electricity is very dangerous. If electricity comes in contact with your body, it can
give you an electric shock. An electric shock injures your body. An electric shock

can even kill you.

~



--- Page 74 ---
Figure 4.2 Never put your finger or a tool into an electrical socket. You will get an electric shock

We need to use electronic devices correctly so that we do not get an electric

shock.

How to plug in an electrical device:

* Make sure your hands are dry.

Make sure the switch at the wall socket is OFF.

Make sure any switches on the device are OFF.

Hold the plug so that your fingers do not touch the metal pins.

Push the plug into the electrical socket in the wall.

Switch ON the switch at the wall.

Switch ON the switch on the device.

How to use an electrical device

* Follow the instructions on how to use the device.

* Instructions on how to use an electronic device are contained in a manual.

» Electricity flows through water, so make sure your hands are dry when you use
electrical devices. Never use an electronic device near any water.

How to unplug an electrical device

* Switch OFF all the switches on the device.

» Switch OFF the switch at the wall socket.

* Pull the plug out of the wall socket. Never pull on the cord or wires to pull a
plug out of the wall.

Activity 2

Work with a partner to do a role play on how to use an electrical device
correctly.
Your role play should cover the following things:

a) how to plug in the device
b) how to use the device safely
c) how to unplug the device.



--- Page 75 ---
/

®

1. An electrical device uses to work.

A. water B. sunlight C. electricity D. lightning
2. The electrical device that uses electricity to make sound is the .

A. television B. kettle C. light bulb D. radio

3. Which of the following statements is true or false.
a) A switch has to be on before you plug an electrical device into an
electrical socket. True/False
b) For television to start working we have to switch on the electricity. True/False
4. Explain why it is important to make sure your hands are dry before you plug

in an electrical device. )

Sources of electricity

There are two sources of electricity that electrical devices use: electricity from a
power station and electricity from a battery.

Electricity from a power station

We generate electricity at power stations such as the Kariba Hydroelectric Power
Station and the Hwange Thermal Power Station. Hydropower is electricity that
comes from water. Thermal power is electricity that comes from coal. The electricity
from a power station is transmitted along wires called power lines to substations
and from substations to the electrical sockets of homes, schools and places of
work around the country.

Figure 4.3 Electricity from a power station is transmitted along power lines to electrical wall sockets where we

can plug in electronic devices



--- Page 76 ---
To make an electrical device work, we plugitinto an electrical socket. The electricity
flows from the wires in the socket though the electrical cord to the electronic
device. Electrical sockets have switches. When the switch is ON, electricity flows
from the electrical socket to the device that is plugged into it. When the switch is
OFF, the electricity does not flow.

Electricity from a battery

Batteries contain stored electricity. We use batteries to supply electricity to
electronic devices when they are not plugged into an electrical socket.

Figure 4.4 The energy stored in batteries make electrical devices like radios work

When energy from a battery runs out, we say that the battery is ‘flat’. A flat battery
cannot make devices work. Some batteries can be re-charged when they run out
of electricity. Cellphone batteries can be re-charged. We re-charge a battery by
using a charging device. The charging device is plugged into an electrical socket.
Electricity flows from the socket into the battery. Other batteries cannot be re-
charged. When the energy is used up, we have to dispose of them. Batteries can
be harmful hence when disposing them place them in a non-metal container and
take them to a recycling centre.

Solar energy is electricity from the sun. When the sun heats the solar panel energy

is stored in a battery. The battery will be connected to an inverter. This will change

the current from the battery's elecricity (DC) to electricity for use in the home AC.
Activity 3

1. Collect pictures of different types of batteries.

2. Make a class collage and label it.



--- Page 77 ---
Sources of electricity in Zimbabwe

o Kariba
Hydropower

@ Harare Thermal

® Dema Diesel
@®Hwange

Thermal
® Munyati

Thermal

@ Bulawayo
Thermal

Figure 4.5 Map of power stations in Zimbabwe

Below are the 6 power stations we have in Zimbabwe.

Kariba hydropower station

Hwange thermal power station

Harare thermal power station
Bulawayo thermal power station
Munyati thermal power station

Dema diesel emergency power station

Dangers of electricity

Electricity is dangerous. When electricity comes in contact with your body, you
can get electric shock. Electric shock can hurt you or even kill you.



--- Page 78 ---
Wall sockets

Figure 4.6 A worn cable and an overloaded wall socket

Open or worn out cables can lead to electrical shock if you touch them.
Overloaded wall sockets can overheat and cause fire.

Electronic appliances

Figure 4.7a) Operating an appliance with wet hands b) Poking a plugged on appliance with a knife

Operating an appliance when your hands are wet can lead to electrical shock.
Using sharp objects to poke appliances plugged on the wall socket can lead to
electrical shock.

Electrical equipment

Figure 4.8 Playing close to power lines or electric fences



--- Page 79 ---
Playing next to electrical cables and power lines can cause electric shock.
Safety precautions when using electricity

Some of us use electricity every day, children and adults alike may forget how
dangerous electricity can be. Staying safe can be easy if you know how to handle
electricity. Below are some of the safety precautions we can follow when han-
dling electricity.

* Do not play near or under power lines.

* If you notice a power line on the ground, do not touch it. Please inform an adult.
Read danger warning signs.

Do not insert anything into a socket.

Appliances should always be unplugged before cleaning.

Any electrical device should be far away from any water source.
Overloaded circuits are dangerous. Do not plug in a device without the
supervision of an adult.

Danger warning signs

HIGH VOLTAGE

Danger of KEEP OUT
Death

Figure 4.9 Danger warning signs

Danger warning signs are there to caution us on the possibility of danger. Figure
4.9 shows some danger warning signs. The first one warns of possible electric shock
so we should not touch. The second warns us as to keep out of the electrical
equipment.

Find out the nearest power lines from your school.

Visit the location and discuss the dangers that you might see.
Draw danger warning signs in groups.

Prepare a short drama to present during assembly.



--- Page 80 ---
Exercise B

. Wires that transfer electricity from the substation to our homes are called .

A. wall socket  B. hydropower C. power lines D. thermal power
. The hydropower station in Zimbabwe is found in ____.

A. Gweru B. Harare C. Hwange D. Kariba
. Which of the following devices stores electricity?

A. radio B. battery C. electriciron D. electric jug
. Electricity from the sunis called ____.

A. thermal B. solar C. hydropower D. biomass
. If you notice a power line on the ground you

A. pickitup

B. touch it

C. do not touch it

D. do not touch it and notify an adult.

Name two sources of electricity.

. What does the following danger warning sign mean?

8. Overloaded wall sockets can cause 3 and

Electric conductors and insulators

An electric circuit is a path in which electric current flows. Electric current is a flow
of electric charge. A circuit is made by linking electrical components together
with pieces of wire cable. uy

How electricity flow in a circuit

Materials which allow electric current to flow in a circuit are called conductors.



--- Page 81 ---
Materials that do not allow electricity fo pass through them easily are called
insulators.

Which materials are conductors and which are
insulators?

You will need: aluminium foil, copper coins, metal keys, plastic, matchstick,
pencil lead, eraser, glass, batteries, circuit boards, electrical wires, bulb.

1. Connect the circuit board. The bulb must light up.

2. One by one place the free wires of your circuit board in contact with the two
ends of the samples you have collected.

SN

Figure 4.10

3. Put your results in a table below.

Material Material it is made up of Bulb
Ke Metal Lit up
Pencil
Eraser Rubber
Lunch box Plastic ]

]

Matchstick
Cup Glass
Nai metal 1]

From the activity, you found out that materials made of metals such as copper
and aluminium are conductors of electricity. Materials such as rubber, wood,
plastic, wool and glass do not allow electricity to pass through them easily. They
are insulators.

f



--- Page 82 ---
Summary

* There are many electronic devices.

* We need to be careful when using electronic devices.
* There are five power stations in Zimbabwe.

* Danger warning signs caution us from harm or death.
* Conductors allow electricity current to flow in a circuit.

* Insulators do not readily allow electricity current to flow in a circuit.



--- Page 83 ---
ILIMKED Forces

Objectives

You should be able to:

1. illustrate magnetic force

2. explain action of magnets as force at a distance
3. identify devices with magnets.

Flashback ¢ Key words

Have you ever opened and 7 magnet force magnetic
closed a refrigerator door? What force magnetic field

keeps the door closed?

Magnets

A fridge door closes itself because the magnets pull it shut and prevents it from
bouncing back open.

A magnet is an object that pulls metal things towards it. We say that a magnet
‘attracts’ metal things.

Figure 4.11 When you put a magnet close to metal things, it pulls them towards itself

Your teacher will bring some magnets to class. You will test which materials are

attracted to the magnet.

1. Collect some small objects made of different materials including metal,
plastic, wood, paper and stone. For example, plastic bottle caps, sticks,

paper, grass, stones and metal bottle tops.



--- Page 84 ---
2. One by one test if the magnet can attract each object. \
3. Write the results of your tests in a table like this:

Object What material is it made Does the magnet attract

Magnetic force

A magnet pulls things towards itself by a magnetic force. A force is a push or a
pull that one object applies to another object. If a force is strong enough, it can
make an object move. For example, you apply a push or a pull force to a desk. If
the force is strong enough, the desk will move across the floor.

Figure 4.12 A force is a push or a pull

Action of magnets at a distance

A magnet can pull metal things towards it without the objects having to touch
each other. This is because a magnet has a magnetic field around it. A magnetic
field is a space around a magnet in which objects are pushed or pulled by the
magnetic force. We cannot see a magnetic field. We know it is there because
when we put metal things inside this space, they are pulled towards the magnet.
We say that a magnet applies a force on objects at a distance.

= — —

Figure 4.13 Magnetic force acts without the objects having to touch each other.



--- Page 85 ---
Your teacher will bring some magnets and drawing pins or similar small metal
objects to class. You will use them to show that magnetic force acts over a

distance.
Put the metal object and the magnet on a desk apart from each other so

that they do not pull towards each other.
Slowly move the magnet closer to the metal object until it moves towards

the magnet.
Repeat this, and this fime use a ruler to measure how far away the magnet

can be and still attract the metal.

Figure 4.14 Measuring how far a magnet can be from an object and still attract it

Devices with a magnet

We use magnets in some devices to do useful things. The table shows examples of
devices with magnets in them and what they do.

Table 4.2 Devices with magnets

Loudspeaker Computer hard drive Refrigerator door

Makes sounds louder Records information Keeps the door closed



--- Page 86 ---
Scrapyard crane Electric fan Television

Lifts pieces of scrap metal Makes blades move Shows picture
on screen

Bank card Compass Generator

Records information Shows direction Makes
electricity

Activity 8
1. With the help of your teacher find the magnet in a device such as a

loudspeaker.
2. How can you test that it is a magnet?

Exercise C

. Which of the following materials is attracted by a magnet?
A. paper B. iron nail C. wood D. plastic
. A force can make an object .
A. shine B. hot C. move D. cold
. These devices contain magnets except
A. a clock B. a loudspeaker C. a refrigerator door D. a bank card
. What is a force?
. Describe what would happen if you brought a magnet close to a metal
paperclip.

. How does a magnet attract an iron nail without touching it?



--- Page 87 ---
Summary

A magnet is an object that pulls metal things towards it.

A magnet pulls things towards itself by a magnetic force.

A force is a push or a pull that one object applies to another object.
If a force is strong enough, it can make an object move.

A magnet applies a force on an object at a distance.

We use magnets in some devices.

Glossary

conductor - a material which allows electric current to flow in a circuit

insulator - amaterial that does not allow electricity to pass through them
so readily

manual - the book that contains instructions on how to operate an
electric device

electrical socket -the place into which we plug electric devices to give them

electricity

re-charge - to refill a battery with electricity after it has gone flat
electric shock - when electricity flows through a person's body

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

. The electric bulb can only produce light when
A. the switch is off B. the switch is on
C. electricity is available D. the switch is on and electricity is available
. A cellphone battery needs to be .
A. switched on B. switched off C. saved D. charged
. Electricity from Kariba Power Station gets to homes and schools along .
A. power sockets B. power lines C. plugs D. cords
. Do not place electric devices near ;
A. heat B. cold C. air D. water
. Some of electricity used in Zimbabwe is generated at
A. Gweru and Chinhoyi B. Hwange and Kadoma
C. Harare and Bulawayo D. Hwange and Kariba
. The following are electrical devices except .
A. television B. compass C. radio D. cellphone
. Magnets attract ;
A. paper B. metal C. wood D. plastic



--- Page 88 ---
8. The following devices contain magnets except :
A. loud speaker B. refrigerator door C. electric fan D. bicycle
Magnets attract metal objects by a magnetic .
A. force B. fan C. rope D. glue
. The following materials are insulators except .
A. wood B. rubber C. metal D. plastic

Structured questions

a) Name three devices that we use at home and at school that use electricity.

b) Name two sources of electricity that electrical devices may use.
a) Aforceisa_____ora____

b) A magnetic force acts over a

c) Name a magnetic device and state what itis used for.

[3]
(2]
[2]
[1]
[2]



--- Page 89 ---
Figure 5.1 The two huts are not the same because they are built from different designs

Introduction

For us to build a hut or make an object or machine, we have to design it first. When
we design something, we make a drawing of it to show what the final product will
look like. In this topic, you are going to design and then make a model of an object
that looks like your design.

(IGED) Elements of design

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. appreciate elements of design
2. manipulate materials such as clay or papier mache to make artefacts.

In topic 2 Materials and structures "elements of design form
texture decoration

Flashback ¢ Key words
Va —

you made a design sketch of a tool
to make an artefact and drew an
urban or rural structure. When we
do a design what do you need to
think about?



--- Page 90 ---
What are the elements of design?

Were the models of urban or rural structures that were drawn by different people
in your class in Term one, all the same? Were they all the same size, the same
shape or the same colour?

Buildings and objects look different to each other because they are designed
differently.

Elements of design are the things that we have to think about when we design
something. They are the things that will affect what an object will look like.

There are 5 elements of design.

1. Lines

2. Colour

3. Form ®
4, Texture

5. Balance

Lines

We use lines to draw our designs. The lines can be smooth or jagged; straight or
curved; thick or thin.

C1]

a

a) a smooth line and a jagged line b) a straight and a curved line c) a thick and a thin line

Figure 5.2 There are different kinds of lines used in designs

Colour

Different colours can be used in our designs. Colour can make an object look
more interesting or attractive.
Look at all the different colours you can choose from in Figure 5.3.

Figure 5.3 There are different colours used in designs



--- Page 91 ---
Form

Form is the shape of an object. The shape can be round, square, rectangular or
even something that is iregular or unusual.
Some of the different shapes that we can use in our designs are shown in Figure 5.4.

FE square

rectangle

triangle
circle
hexagon star irregular heart

shape

Figure 5.4 There are different kinds of shapes used in designs

Texture

We have to make sure that we choose the texture we want to use in our designs.
Different objects have different textures. The texture of something is what it feels
like when you touch it with the tips of your fingers.

The texture of an object can be smooth (like a glass window) or rough (like
sandpaper). It can be soft (like a feather) or hard (like a stone).

Look at the objects in Figure 5.5. Which objects have a smooth texture and which

have a rough texture?

Figure 5.5 Do these things have a smooth or a rough texture?



--- Page 92 ---
Balance

We have to make sure that our design is balanced. When the parts of a design is
pleasant, it is a balanced design. It should not look like there are a lot more things
on one side of the design than on another side.

The left side of the design should look like it is in balance with the right side of the
design. The top and bottom sides should also be in balance.

Figure 5.6 shows ways of making a design balanced. Can you see how they work?

@ —=a

a) Use a mix of light and dark colours b) Place larger objects near the centre of the design and
smaller object further away from the centre.

Figure 5.6 Ways to balance a design

Draw a smooth line and a jagged line. Which looks nicer?
Draw a square. Did you have to use a curved or a straight line?
Draw a heart shape. Did you have to use a curved or a straight line?
Colour in your square with a blue crayon or paint.

Colour in your heart with a green crayon or paint.

Did colouring in your shapes make them look more or less attractive?
Draw your own shape and colour it in with any colour that you want.
Name two objects in the classroom that have a shiny texture.

Name two objects in the classroom that have a rough texture.

0. Which picture (A or B) in Figure 5.7 is balanced? Explain why.

SCENE mN =

Figure 5.7 Which design is balanced?


--- Page 93 ---
Design a hat or a shoe.

Use a pencil to make a drawing of a hat or a shoe that you would like to make.
Colour your drawing in.

Add any decorations that you want on your hat or shoe to your drawing.

Models from materials such as papier-mache and clay

When we design something we make a drawing of it first, then we make a model of it
so we can see what it will look like. A model is a smaller copy of something that is usually
made of papier-mache or clay. Look at the picture in Figure 5.8 that shows a clay
model of a car.

Figure 5.8 A clay model car

We can use papier-mache and clay to make models because it is easy to squeeze
and press them into different shapes.

How to make papier-mache for making models

1. Collect old newspapers and tear them into very small pieces.

2. Put the torn pieces of newspaper into a bucket and pour water in so that it
covers the pieces of newspaper.

3. Add glue and flour to the bucket and mix with the newspaper pieces and water.

4. Leave the mixture to settle overnight.

5. The next day you will find a thick paste, which you can use to make your model.

How to prepare clay for making models

1. Dig up some clay soil. You can easily get clay soil from an anthill.
2. Remove anystones fromthe soil. Break up and grind the lumps of soil to make sure

that the clay soil is like powder.


--- Page 94 ---
Put the clay soil in a bucket and pour water in, a little at a time.

Mix the clay soil and the water until you form a thick paste that can be squeezed
and pressed into different shapes (for example, a ball or a sausage).

5. The clay can now be used to make your model.

Hw

Make a model of the hat or shoe that you designed.

1. Make a model of the hat or shoe that you designed in the previous
activity using either papier-mache or clay.

2. Let your model dry in the sun.

Figure 5.9 Clay models of a hat and a shoe

Decorations

When we have finished making a model of the object that we have designed we
need to decorate it so that it looks more attractive. Decoration is the process of
making something attractive.

We can use different materials to decorate models. Paint is used to add colour to
the model. Beads, seeds, feathers, sand, stones, aluminium foil, shells and bottle
tops are used to add colour as well as texture to the model.

Decorate your model hat or shoe from Activity 3.

Use whatever materials you can find to decorate your model. You could use
things like paint, glue, beads, seeds, feathers, sand, stones, aluminium foil, shells
or even bottle tops to decorate your model.

1. First paint your model hat or shoe the same colour as you used in your

design from Activity 2.



--- Page 95 ---
2.

\

Use glue to decorate your model with the items you brought to your lesson. |
|
Figure 5.10 A decorated clay model of a hat and a shoe p |
Summary
* The elements of design are lines, colour, form, texture and balance.
* We can use papier mache and clay to design and model objects.
* Papiermache can be made by mixing newspaper cuttings, glue, flour and water.
* Clay can be made from clay soil.
* We can decorate papier mache or clay models using beads, seeds,
feathers, sand, stones, aluminium foil, shells and bottle tops.
* Decorations make models more attractive.
Glossary
elements of design - the things that we have to think about when we
design something
texture - what the surface of something feels like when you
touch it with the tips of your fingers
form - the shape of an object
model - a smaller copy of something (a real object) which is

papier-mache -

decorate -

usually made of papier mache or clay

a mixture of newspaper cuttings, water, flour and glue

that is used in making models
to make something look attractive using different
colours, beads, bottle tops etc.



--- Page 96 ---
End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

Choose the correct answer
. Important things that you should think about when designing models are .
A. elements of design B. pictures of design
C. drawings of design D. models of design
. Which of the following is an element of design?
A. colour B. air C. electricity D. food
. Which of the following is not an element of design?
A. line B. colour C. electricity D. shape
. Which of the following is not a colour?
A.red B. picture C. yellow D. green
. Lines are used to
A. bring the texture of the model
B. make sketches of a model
C. balance the shape of a model
D. mix clay
. Texture is the of materials.
A. longest and widest
B. roughness and smoothness
C. brightest and dimness
D. availability
. What is the texture of clay?
A.rough B. thick C. smooth D. thin
is a material that you can use to make models.
A.Sand B. Papier mache
C.Loam soil D. Gold
. Which of the following material is not used in the making of papier mache?
A. glue B. newspaper C. sand D. water
. Why do we decorate models?
A. to make them strong B. to make them big
C. to make them more attractive D. to make them cheap [10]

Structured questions

. List five elements of design.

. List three materials you need in order to make papier mache

. Other than papier mache what else can you use to make models?
. Why do you decorate models?



--- Page 97 ---
Figure 6.1 We need water to live

Infroduction

Water has unique properties. Water flows from a higher place to a lower place
some water sinks into the soil. Water is found in different places. We need to make
water safe for drinking. Water can be harzardous during flooding.

(Unit 15 Properties of water

Objectives

You should be able to:
identify properties of water
predict where water will flow to in the local environment
demonstrate water flowing from a higher to a lower place
describe water infiltration
observe water infiltration
design a model of a water filter



--- Page 98 ---
Flashback ¢ Key words

Think about how you have used /

properties solvent flow runoff

water today. Water has many laliliiceiflely

different uses. Make a list of all the
ways we use water in our homes
and in our schools.

Properties of water

The properties of a substance are the things that describe it. They are the things that
tell us what it looks like, what it smells like, what is tastes like and how it behaves.

Water has unique properties. These properties make it a special substance.

Some of the properties of pure, clean water are:

it is colourless (it is clear with no colour)

it is odourless (it does not smell like anything, only dirty water smells)
it is tasteless (it does not taste of anything)

it is a solvent (things like sugar and salt can dissolve in it)

it can flow (it can move from one place to another)

Activity 1

Your teacher will give you a cup of clean water, some sugar and a teaspoon.

1.

2.
3.
4

What colour is the water?

Smell the water. What does the water smell like?

Take a sip of the water. What does the water taste like?

Add a teaspoon of sugar to the water and stir the mixture with a spoon.
What happens to the sugar?

Pour the water in the cup into a large container. How does the water move?
Write a list of the properties of water that you have seen.



--- Page 99 ---
Figure 6.2 Properties of water

Water flows

You have learned that water flows from one place to another.
Look at the pictures in Figure 6.3. What direction is the water flowing in the pictures?

Soo,

Victoria Falls yi
a plughole

a shower

Figure 6.3 What direction is the water flowing?



--- Page 100 ---
Activity 2

1. Go outside into the school grounds with your group. Each member of your group
should have a cup of water.

Find different places on the school grounds where there is a hard surface on a slope.
Pour a cup of water onto the hard surface and watch what happens to the water.
In which direction does water flow on a hard surface? Does it flow from a high place
to alow place or alow place to a high place?

HOON

When water is poured onto a hard surface, it moves from a high place to alow place.

Have you ever seen how water flows soon after it rains? Rainwater that falls onto the
ground will flow from high places to low places. Water that flows over the ground after
it rains is called runoff.

Activity 3

Predict where water will flow in each of the pictures in Figure 6.4

Figure 6.4
. If a cup of water is spilt at position A on the steps, will the water flow to positio
B or to position C?

. Water is flowing in one direction along this river. Is it flowing from position A tg
position B or from position A to position C?

Figure 6.5



--- Page 101 ---
3. From the activity we can see that in Figure 6.4a) water flows from position to posi-
tion. Then in Figure 6.4b) water flows to position C showing that water flows from
a higher place to a lower place.

Water infiltration

When rain falls on hard soil the rain water flows over the surface of the ground
from a higher place to a lower place.

If the soil is loose the water sinks into the soil. The movement of water though the
soil surface and into the soil is called infiltration.

Activity 4

1. Fill up a transparent container such as a glass beaker or a jam jar with loose
soil.
2. Pour water slowly from a cup onto the surface of the loose soil.

Figure 6.6 Water sinks into loose soil

3. Observe what happens to the water. Where does the water go?

Before we grow crops such as mealies or tomatoes it is important to dig or plough
the soil to loosen it before planting seeds.

When the soil is loose, water can sink into it more easily. This makes more water
pass into the soil by infiltration and less water flows away by runoff. This means that
there is more water for the plants in the soil, so they will grow better.



--- Page 102 ---
/ | /
/

Figure 6.7 Water either sinks into the soil by infiltration or flows over its surface by runoff
Water filters

Water that we collect from rivers or dams is not pure water. This water may contain
bits of soil, dead leaves and different types of germs.

If we want to drink this water it is important to purify it. We can use a water filter to
make water clear.

Figure 6.7 shows a simple water filter that anyone can make if they have a plastic
bottle, gravel, sand, charcoal and fabric such as a cheesecloth. When water is
poured into the top of the water filter it travels through the layers of stones (gravel),
sand, charcoal and then through the cheesecloth. The bits of soil, dead leaves and
some of the germs are removed from the water as they pass though the different
layers of the filter. Clear water comes out of the bottom of the filter.

Water that comes out of the bottom of the filter must then be boiled to get rid of the
rest of the germs.

sand

charcodl

Figure 6.8 A simple water filter Cheese cloth



--- Page 103 ---
Work in a group.

1. Collect whatever materials you can find that are similar to the water filter
in Figure 6.8.

2. Design and build your own water filter.

3. Pour dirty water collected from a river or dam into your water filter. Does

the dirty water come out?

1. The following are all properties of water except
A.water is colourless
B. water has a sour taste
C.water does not have a smell
D. water flows
2. When water is poured on a high place, it will
A. flow to a higher place
B. sink to a higher place
C.flow to a lower place
D. flow from clouds like rain
3. Water poured on loose soil that has been dug will .
A.stay on top of the soil
B. infiltrates into the soil
C.flow across the surface of the soil
D. flow to a higher place

4. Waterisa because things like sugar and salt can dissolve in it.
5. When water is poured on to the ground it moves from a place to a
place.

6. The movement of water though the soil surface and into the soil is called

Summary

e Water has many properties. It is colourless, odourless and tasteless. It is a solvent
and it can flow.
e Water flows from a high place to a low place.

¢ Infiltration is when water sinks into the soil.



--- Page 104 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:
list natural sources of water
describe natural water sources
identify man-made water sources
compare man-made to natural sources of water
design models of man-made sources of water.

Flashback ¢ Key words

Where does the water that you / spring reservoir rainwater
drink come from? Does all the water source

that you drink or use come from the

same place or different places? Talk

about where you get your water

from with your partner.

Natural sources of water

Some of the water that we use come from natural sources.

A natural source of water is one that is not made by people. It is part of the natural
environment and supplies plants and animals as well as people with water.

Natural sources of water are:
oe natural lakes and ponds

e rivers and streams

e seas and oceans ~ti
e springs |

Lakes and ponds are filled with fresh water.
There are no natural lakes in Zimbabwe but

there are many very large natural lakes in Africa,
for example, Lake Malawi.

1
Figure 6.9 Lake Malawi is visible from space


--- Page 105 ---
Rivers and streams have fresh water
that flows from one place to another.
Zimbabwe has many rivers and streams.
Two well known rivers are the Zambezi
and the Limpopo rivers.

Seas and oceans are filled with salt water.
Salt water is not good to drink. Zimbabwe
is a landlocked country which means that
it is surrounded by other countries and so
it is not next to an ocean.

Figure 6.11 The Indian Ocean of Mozambique

Springs occur when water which has sunk into the ground rises up and comes
out of the ground again. Water from springs is fresh water but it can be hot or
cold. Water from hot springs also contains minerals. Many people believe the
water from hot springs has the power to cure certain diseases. In Zimbabwe we
have hot springs in Binga and Nyanyadzi.

Figure 6.12 Binga Hot springs



--- Page 106 ---
Activity 6

Name the different types of natural water sources.
Explain the difference between a lake and a river to your partner.
Explain the difference between the water in a lake and the water in the sea

to your partner.

Draw a picture of a hot spring showing the water coming out of the ground.
Find any pictures of natural water sources in magazines or newspapers. Bring
your pictures to class and stick them onto a large poster on the classroom
wall. Label each picture correctly.

Man-made sources of water

Some of the water that we use comes from man-made sources.

A man-made source of water is one that is made by people.
Man-made sources of water are:

e dams

e boreholes and wells

e rainwater tanks

A dam is a man-made barrier that holds water in a large reservoir behind the
barrier. Kariba dam was built on the Zambezi river in Zimbabwe.

Boreholes and wells are man-made structures that allow us to get to underground
water. A hole is dug or drilled into the ground to get to the water and an electric
pump is usually used to bring the water up to the surface.

Rainwater tanks can be used to collect water that falls onto the roofs of buildings.
The rainwater flows into gutters which carry the water to the rainwater tank.

Pipes are used to carry water from man-made water sources to people's houses
or communities. A tap coming off the pipe can be opened or closed to control
how much water we want to use.

Figure 6.13: Man-made sources of water



--- Page 107 ---
1. Draw a picture of a man-made source of water in your school or your

community.
2. Tell your partner how it works. Pp

Using papier-mache or clay or cardboard, make a model of any of the man-
made sources of water you have learned about: a dam, a borehole or well or a

rainwater tank.

>

Figure 6.14 A model of a borehole pump

Compare natural sources of water and man-made
sources of water

Look at the table below. It compares natural sources of water to man-made
sources of water.

Natural sources Man made sources
Not made by people Made by people

Some have fresh water such as lakes, | All have fresh water
rivers, streams and springs

Exercise B

A is a man-made source of water.
A. dam B. river C. spring D. ocean



--- Page 108 ---
A is a natural source of water.

A. dam B. borehole C. well D. spring
Which of the following is the largest source of water?

A. dam B. lake C. well D. ocean

A source of water that is not built by people is called a source of
water.

A source of water that is built by people is called a source of water.
At your home do you get your water from a natural or a man-made source?

Summary

Natural sources of water are not made by people.
Man-made sources of water are made by people.

Examples of natural sources of water are natural lakes, ponds, rivers, streams,
seas, oceans and springs.

Examples of man-made sources of water are dams, boreholes, wells and
rainwater tanks.


--- Page 109 ---
Lime Water and the environment

Objectives

You should be able to:

1. identify water hazards caused by floods
2. discuss effects of floods

3. discuss safety precautions

4. demonstrate safety precautions.

Flashback Key words
Think about what it's like when it of * flood drown pollution
rains. Is all rain the same?

Floods

Rain is something we look forward to. We need rain to water our crops and
provide our animals with water to drink. Rain fills our dams and rivers and provides
us with the water that we need.

However, sometimes we get too much rain. The rivers and dams overflow and
the water covers the land. We call this flooding.

A flood is a large amount of water covering an area of land that is usually dry.

Figure 6.15 A flooded maize field



--- Page 110 ---
Accidents caused by floods

Floods are very dangerous. Look at the picture in Figure 6.15. What could happen
to the animals and homes? What could happen to the people who were staying
in the homes?

When you look at a river you can see that the water can sometimes flow very
quickly. When water flows very quickly in a river, it is very powerful. Water in floods
can also flow very quickly and can be strong enough to carry the bus and people
away. Many vehicles are damaged and many people may drown in floods.

Floods can burst river banks and water flows into homes, schools, factories and
clinics leading to a lot of hazards.

Flooding can lead to pollution. Pollution is the introduction of a toxic chemical
into the environmnent. Water flows into factories where they keep chemicals for
making things, the water will wash away the chemicals. This pollution can lead to
diseases as people and animals are poisoned by polluted flood water.

Flooding can also lead to death through electric shock. If water flows into a
building that has electricity we need to switch off the mains as this can lead to an
electric shock.

Effects of floods

How could a flood affect the lives of people in your community?
Water from a flood has many effects on a community.

Floods may result in;

e damage to homes and other buildings

e destruction of crops

e the death of animals and people (by drowning).



--- Page 111 ---
Figure 6.16 The effect of floods

Work in a group.

Discuss all the possible effects of a flood on your community. Talk about
» the effects of a flood on your family
» the effects of a flood on your school.

Safety precautions

We can take safety precautions to reduce the dangerous effect of flooding.

Some of the safety precautions we can take are:

e To build our houses on high ground (avoid building houses in river valleys).

¢ Make sandbags by filling sacks with sand. These can be put in front of doors
to prevent water from getting into our homes.

e Disconnect all electrical appliances. Electricity moving through water is very
dangerous.

e Move to higher ground and wait for help.

e Do not move though flowing water. Just six inches of moving water can make
you fall down and drown.

e If you have to walk though water, make sure that it is not moving. Use a long
stick to feel the ground ahead of you to make sure that the water is not too
deep and that the soil is not too soft to walk on.

Discuss the safety precautions that you should take if you had to leave
your school due to a flood. Make a list of what you would need to do.
Practice how your class would leave your school following the instructions

on your list.



--- Page 112 ---
Summary
e Too much rain can cause floods.

e People can drown in floods.

e Floods can destroy buildings, crops and animals.
e We canreduce the dangerous effect of flooding by taking safety precautions.

Glossary

dissolve - become part of a liquid so as to form a solution

drown - die through breathing in water

hazard - a risk of danger

gutter - a shallow container fixed beneath the edge of a roof for
carrying rain water

overflow - flow over the available space

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

. The following are properties of water except .

A. colourless B. sweet C. odourless D. flows
. Sugar and salt can dissolve in water because water is }

A.a liquid B. colourless C. tasteless D. a solvent
. Where does water flow in our local environment?

A. From lower places to higher places

B. From higher places to lower places

C. Upwards

D. Water does not flow
. When rain falls on ploughed land it mostly .

A. flows B. grows C. floods D. sinks
. Dirty water can be cleared by a

A. borehole B. filter C. tap D. bottle
. The following are natural sources of water except .

A. river B. sea C. dam D. ocean
. Which from the following is a man-made source of water?

A. spring A. river C. borehole D. ocean



--- Page 113 ---
An is a very large natural source of water.

A. dam B. borehole C. spring D. ocean
The following can be caused by floods except .
A. destruction of crops

B. destruction of buildings

C. building sandbags

D. drowning of animals

. When | am on my way home and see that a river has flooded |
A. use a stick to cross the river

B. go back to school and notify a teacher

C. swim across the river

D. help other people to cross the river

Structured questions

. List any three properties of water.
. a) Give two examples of natural sources of water.
b) Give two examples of man-made sources of water.

. Explain why floods are dangerous for animals.
. Give two safety precautions you can take if your home is flooded.



--- Page 114 ---
Weather and climate

Figure 7.1 Different kinds of weather

Introduction

Weather changes from one day to the next. It changes because of different
weather elements. In this topic you will learn about the different elements that
affect weather. You will also find out how weather can be hazardous.

(Unit 18 ] Weather elements

Objective

You should be able to:
1. identify weather elements.

Flashback Key words

Describe what the weather is like ¢ temperature, thermometer

today. Is it the same as the weather / rain gauge, waterproof, icon,
you had yesterday or the weather rime. weather
you had last week? ’



--- Page 115 ---
Weather elements

Weather is a description of the outside air in a certain place at a certain fime.
There are 5 weather elements that affect the weather. These are:
* Temperature

Sunshine

* Wind

e Rainfall

* Cloud cover
Temperature

Temperature is a measure of how hot or cold it is. The temperature that we see
on the weather forecast is the temperature of the air around us. Temperature
is measured in units called degrees Celsius (°C) using an instrument called a
thermometer.

Figure 7.2 A thermometer that can measure air temperature

Air temperature around us affects how hot or cold we feel. When it is hot, we dress
and behave differently to when it is cold.

Sunshine

During the day the sun shines. At night the sun sets and does not shine.

\ /

. \ /
~ -
i —

/ \

TY | \

_—

Figure 7.3 The sun shines very brightly. The sun gives off heat and light. The sun warms the environment.



--- Page 116 ---
When there are no clouds in the sky and we can see the sun, we feel warm. The
sunlight is bright and can hurt our eyes. We should not look directly into the sun.
When the sun is hidden by clouds we feel colder and the sunlight is less bright.

Wind
Wind is the movement of air. When there is wind we say that the weather is windy.
Where there is no wind, we say that the weather is calm or that the air is still.

Figure 7.4 A very windy day

Rainfall

Rain is the water that falls from clouds in the
form of rain drops. We can measure the amount
of rain that falls using an instrument called a
rain gauge.

When we go out on a rainy day, we need to 8
wear waterproof clothing and shoes to prevent

ourselves from getting too wet. Umbrellas also

protect us from the rain.

Figure 7.5 A rain gauge filling up with water

Cloud cover

The clouds that are in the sky are called cloud
cover. We say the sky is clear when there are
no clouds (or very few clouds) in the sky and
we say the sky is cloudy when there are a lot
of clouds in the sky.

Figure 7.6 The sky is cloudy



--- Page 117 ---
The picture below shows some icons or symbols that represent different kinds of
weather elements. Choose the letter of the icon that you think matches each of
the following types of weather.

represents a hot day.

represents a sunny day.

represents a rainy day.

represents a cloudy day.

_______ represents a windy day.

gecleclo

Figure 7.7 Symbols representing different weather elements /

iP

In your group use mime to act how you would behave when there is a particular
weather condition. Mime is acting without speaking. The rest of the class must
guess which kind of weather condition you are trying to show.

Choose one of the following weather conditions: cold day, hot day, sunny day,
cloudy day, rainy day, windy day. J

The following are elements of weathere¢ pt

A. temperature B. cloudy C. rainfall D. sunshine

When there is are lot of clouds, we say, "it is J

A. cold B. clear C. cloudy D. bright

When there is no wind, we say, “it is J

A. windy B. calm C. clear D. cloudy
Which element shows how hot or cold it is outside?

A. wind B. sunshine C. temperature D. cloud cover
Instrument used to measure rainfall is

A. thermometer B. windvane C. rain gauge D. cup



--- Page 118 ---
Summary

There are five weather elements: temperature, sunshine, wind, rainfall and
cloud cover.
* We can use symbols to show the weather conditions for a particular day.


--- Page 119 ---
(LIED) weather and climate hazards

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. discuss weather and climate hazards
2. discuss effects of weather and climate hazards.

Flashback a Key words

You learned about floods in Topic W ciate. wecther. He
6: Water. Flooding is an example of / drought lighthing. icici os
extreme weather conditions. Flooding haaiays

is when there is a heavy rainfall in a

short period of time. When there is no

rain at all that is an extreme weather

condition. What is it called when there

is no rain at all in the rainy season?

Weather and climate hazards

Weather hazard is an extreme weather event that threatens people or property.
Climate is a pattern of weather for a long period of time.

Climatic hazards are caused by one or a combination of:

floods

e fires

* cyclone

* heatwave
* droughts
Floods

A flood is a large amount of water coven, 71 an area of land that is usually
dry. Flooding occurs when there is heavy rainfall in a short period of time.

Fires

Fires can occur when the weather has been
very hot and dry. Plants or buildings made
of wood or thatch easily catch fire and burn
quickly. Fires destroy buildings and kill plants
(animal grazing) and animals and people.

A fire may often be caused by lightning.
Lightning occurs during thunderstorms and
if it hits a building or a tree it may start a fire.

Figure 7.8 Lightning causing a fire



--- Page 120 ---
Cyclone

A cyclone is a large, powerful storm with very strong winds. A storm is a sudden
appearance of bad weather often with strong winds, heavy rain or ice.

The wind in a cyclone rotates or goes round and round in circles. Cyclones can
be very hazardous and the strong winds of a cyclone can destroy buildings and
crops and kill people and animals.

Figure 7.9 Cyclones can be dangerous (a) The shape of a cyclone (b) Mankonkoni Bridge on the Thuli River
destroyed by Cyclone Eline in 2000

Heatwave

Sometimes the air temperature is high.
In Zimbabwe this often happens in September

and October. However, when the air
temperature remains very high for more than

a few days we call this a heatwave.
A heatwave is the period of time in which

we experience very hot weather.

During a heatwave it is important to drink lots

of water and to keep cool.

Figure 7.10 Experiencing a heatwave


--- Page 121 ---
Drought

A drought is caused by a long period of
time with little or no rain. Plants need rain
to grow. We need rain to fill dams. Without
rain plants will die. Without plants and
water people and animals will die of
hunger and thirst.

Figure 7.10 A drought destroys crops

In your group talk about how each of the climate hazards could affect your
family and your community.

Summary

e Unusual changes in weather may cause floods, fires, cyclones, heatwaves
and droughts.

Glossary

weather - conditions found in the air around us

waterproof - something that repels water

icon/symbol - a simple picture of something

lightning - flashes of light in the sky that are produced during a storm
instrument - qa tool or gadget

mime - acting without speaking

cyclone - alarge powerful storm with very strong winds

heatwave - the period of time in which we experience very hot weather

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

. When there are many clouds in the sky we say it is
A. rainy B. cloudy C. clear D. hot
. We measure temperature with a
A. thermometer B. icon C. ruler D. rain gauge
. Which of the following is not a weather element?
A. fire B. wind C. cloud D. temperature



--- Page 122 ---
Which of the following is the hazardous part of a cyclone?

A. fire B. wind C. cloud D. rain
5. If rains do not fall in an area during summer, we say there is a

A. cyclone B. thunderstorm  C. heatwave D. drought
6. When it is raining we prevent ourselves from getting wet by using a

A. scarf B. gloves C. raincoat D. sunhat
7. Floods are caused by heavy in a short period of time.

A. wind B. rain C. heat D. cold
8. Fires may be caused by
A. rain B. wind C. clouds D. lightning

9. When there is drought all of the following happen except
A. plants dry up and die
B. animals die from hunger and thirst
C. bridges are washed away
D. people die of hunger and thirst
10. What weather element causes a flood?
A. rain B. wind C. cloud D. temperature

Structured questions

Name the five weather elements.
What is temperature?

Name the climate hazard that causes;
a) plants to dry up and die

b) plants and buildings to burn

c) people to get very hot

d) buildings to be destroyed by winds



--- Page 123 ---
Landfoms and maps

Topic

8

Figure 8.1 Landforms in Africa (a) Matobo Hills in Zimbabwe (b) A volcano in the Democratic Republic of
Congo

Introduction
When we take a walk in the natural environment we can see many different things.

Mountains, valleys, rivers and hills. These make the environment interesting to look
at and affect our lives in many different ways.

(LEED) Types of landforms

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. identify landforms
2. design models of landforms.



--- Page 124 ---
Flashback . Key words

S/S "landform lava diorama

Think about the route that you took
coming to school today. Are there
any interesting natural things that
you passed, for example, a river or a
hill or a waterfall?

A landform is a surface feature of the earth. A landform is a natural formation on
the earth’s surface. This means that it is not man-made. Each kind of landform
has a particular shape that helps us to recognize it.

There are different types of landforms. Table 8.1 shows the different types of
landforms.

Mountain Volcano

A mountain is a very tall landmass. It | A volcano is a mountain or hill with a

is much higher than a hill. Mountains | cone shape which has an opening or

are usually very steep and rocky. crater at the top. Hot gases, ash and
lava pass out of the opening or crater
volcano when it erupts.



--- Page 125 ---
Hill Valley

A hill is a rounded raised area of A valley is a low area of land between
land. It is not as high as a mountain. | hills or mountains.

Plain River

A plain is an area of land that is flat. | Ariveris a large, natural body of water
Plains are usually covered with grass. | that flows towards a lake, ocean or
another river.



--- Page 126 ---
Lake Waterfall

A lake is a large, natural body of water | A waterfall consists of moving water that
surrounded by land on all sides. falls off the steep slope of a mountain or the
edge of a cliff and drops downwards.

Figure 8.2 Different types of landforms

Activity 1

. Make a list of all the different landforms that are shown in the table on the
previous page and place a tick next to each type of landform that you have
actually seen.

. How many types of landforms from your list are there in the area where you
live?

. Draw a picture to show one type of landform in the area where you live.

. Look at the picture in Figure 8.3. Provide a name for each of the landforms
Labelled A — F that are shown in the picture.

Figure 8.3 Landforms



--- Page 127 ---
Work in a group.

. Make models of the different types of landforms that you have learned about.
Use clay, papier mache, plasticine or cardboard.

. Put your models together to form a diorama on a paper plate, a piece of
cardboard or in a shallow cardboard box. A diorama is a three dimensional
model showing miniature objects placed in a realistic setting.

. Paint your model so the setting looks redlistic and label each type of landform
with its name written on a piece of paper or card like the models in the picture.

Figure 8.4 A diorama made of models of different types of landforms

Summary

e There are many different types of landforms. Some examples of landforms are
mountains, volcanos, hills, valleys, plains, lakes, waterfalls and rivers.



--- Page 128 ---
Glossary

landform - a natural formation on the Earth's surface that has a particular
shape that helps us to recognize it

lava - the hot, semi liquid rock that passes out of a volcano when it erupts

diorama - a three dimensional model showing miniature objects placed in a
realistic setting

End of topic assessment test

is not a landform.
A. Hill B. River C. Road D. Valley
is a very high landform
A. Valley  B. River C. Lake D. Mountain
is not found in Zimbabwe
A. Hill B. Volcano C. River D. Valley
A plain :
A. is very flat
B. is covered with snow
C. is filled with water
D. is very high
does not come out of a volcano
A. Hot gases B. Snow C. Ash D. Lava [5]

Draw pictures to show what 5 different types of landform look like. [5]



--- Page 129 ---
Unit 21 End of term 2 assessment test

Paper 1

Answer all questions
Choose the correct answer.

1.

Why should you never eat anything when you are in a laboratory?

A. you could burn down the building

B. there is nowhere to sit

C. you could get poisoned

D. food is expensive

It is unhygienic for many people to wash their hands with the same water
because .

A. water is difficult to find

B. this will cause diseases to spread

C. water may cause floods

D. water is unsuitable for washing hands.

Which of the following is a pure substance?

A. sugar and water solution

B. salt and water solution

C. paraffin

D. tea

Which of the following is an impure substance?

A. distilled water B. petrol C. gold D. muddy water
Foods such as bread and sadza give us lots of .

A. energy B. water C. muscles D. speed

Which of the following fuels is a solid?

A. charcoal B. paraffin C. diesel D. petrol

The following are examples of devices that need electricity for them to work
except a .

A. radio B. television C. refrigerator D. plough

The electronic device that will produce heat when electricity is switched on
is called a .

A. switch B. remote control C. refrigerator  D. stove

Which of the following is an electronic device that is used at home to keep
food and water cold?

A. refrigerator B. computer C. stove D. decoder

. When there is a difference in height, water will flow

A. upwards

B. downwards

C. along a level pathway
D. from the soil into the air



--- Page 130 ---
11. The following materials are used to making of papier mache except
A. newspaper
B. glue
C. mud
D. water
12. When designing models you should consider of design in order to
\ make the model look attractive.
A. weather B. elements C. signs D. parts
13. The following are elements of design except
A. colour B. texture C. shape D. temperature
14. Why do we decorate models?
A. to make them expensive
B. to make them beautiful
C. to make them strong
D. to make them soft
15. Water from a high place to a low place.
A. sinks B. flows C. walks . freezes
16. Water when it is poured on loose soil.
A. stops B. sinks C. freezes . floods
17. Which of the following is a natural source of water?
A. river B. borehole C. tap . dam
. Which of the following is a man-made source of water?
A. river B. spring C. borehole . ocean
. The following are all properties of water except
A. water tastes sweet
B. water is colourless
C. water does not have a smell
D. water flows
. Which of the following is not a weather element?
A. fire B. cloud cover C. wind D. temperature
. If rains do not fall in an area during summer, we say there is a
A. cyclone B. cloudy sky C. thermometer D. drought
. Man-made structures are structures that
A. are built by people
B. are destroyed by people
C. are part of the natural environment
D. are models of landforms

. The diagram shows a .

A. river B. volcano D. hill
CA is not a landform.

A. hill B. building C. river D. valley



--- Page 131 ---
25. Which of the following is a landform?
A. aroad B. a table C. a train D. a plain

Paper 2
A

B

Look at the diagram that represents a piece of land sloping downwards

from A to B.

a) Is A or B higher?

b) If you pour water onto the land at point A where will the water go?

c) If you pour water onto loose soil that has been ploughed, what willhappen
to the water?

d) List two bad things that can happen during floods.

a) Name two examples of natural landforms.
b) Name three weather elements.

Say whether the following statements are true or false.

a) A television does not need electricity for it to work. True /False

b) A refrigerator needs electricity for it to work. True /False

c) A cellphone needs batteries for it to work. True/False

d) A switch is not necessary for electricity to be used at home. True/False

e) Most of the electricity used in Zimbabwe comes from Kariba and Hwange
Power stations. True/False [5]

Choose the correct words to fill in the spaces.

(heavy, garden, work, man-made, kitchen)

a) Tools can help us to make easier.

b) A wheel barrow can be used to carry very objects.

c) Garden tools are tools that are used when working in the

d) A spoon is an example of a tool.

e) Materials made by people can be called materials. [5]

a) Name three important elements of design that you should think of when
making models.
b) Name two things that can be used to decorate models. [5]



--- Page 132 ---
Soil, plants and animals

Figure 9.1 People and animals need soil and plants to survive

Introduction

Living things depend on each other and their environment. Plants need soil to grow
and they need animals to pollinate their flowers. Many animals feed on plants.

Yh vy Soil

Objectives

You should be able to:
. describe soil formation
. identify soil types found in the local environment
. distinguish soil types
. explain soil properties
. demonstrate how to make a clay body
. create models made of clay.



--- Page 133 ---
Flashback

Soil is used for many different uses.

. Key words
¢
£

particle decay weathering
property texture aeration
drainage clay sand loam clay
body

Why is soil important to plants and
animals?

Soil formation

Soil is made up of stones as well as smaller soil particles called sand and clay. Soil
is also made up of bits of dead plants such as leaves and dead animals. Dead
plants and animals decay and break up info small pieces/bits. This substance is
called humus. Small animals such as earthworms and ants burrow in the soil. They
create pockets of air as they do so.

Work in a group.

1. Place some soil into a transparent plastic or glass jom. Add some water and
stir the soil and water mixture with a stick.

2. Let the mixture stand for a while and let the water settle. Look/observe at

the different parts of the soil that separate into layers from the bottom up of
the container.

clear water

organic matter

Figure 9.2 Soil is made of different parts

Gravel -small stones

Sand - soil with large particles

Silt -sedimentary mix of sand and clay soil

organic debris -materials such as dead plant and animal matter



--- Page 134 ---
Place some soil onto a piece of paper. Observe the soil through a magnifying
lens. A magnifying lens makes something look much larger.

Describe what can you see?

The muddy water settles into layers. Describe these layers.

Write down the things from the list that you can see in the soil:

* small stones

« small soil particles like clay and sand (a particle is a very small part)

* bits of dead plants and dead animals

small animals

How soil is formed

Soil comes from rocks. Did you know that soil comes from rocks?

Rocks break down to form stones and the particles of sand and clay that make up
soil. Rocks are broken down in the process called weathering. Weathering is the
breaking down of rocks into smaller pieces.

Soil forms continuously in nature. It takes a very long time for soil to form. Therefore
soil should be considered as a non-renewable resource.

Figure 9.3 Rocks break down

The weathering of rocks is caused by plant and animal life, changes in temperature
and moving water. Plant roots and animals can get into the cracks in rocks and
cause the cracks to get bigger.

Changes in temperature can cause rocks to break up. When it gets very cold at
night after a hot day, cracks may appear in rock or they may get larger.

Water that runs over the surface of a rock may wear away the surface of the

rock.



--- Page 135 ---
Figure 9.4 Plant roots are breaking up the rock

In this activity you are going demonstrate the breaking down of rocks to form soil

particles .

1. Rub two rocks together over a piece of paper.

2. Observe what forms on the paper.

3. Observe/describe what happens when you rub the two rocks together? You
are wearing away the surface of the rocks and getting small particles that will
become part of soil.

4. Soil consists of different parts. What would you have to add to the rock
particles to form soil?

Types of soil

There are three main types of soil: clay soil, sandy soil and loam soil.

clay loam sand

Figure 9.5 Different kinds of soil [add captions under each pile of soil in the order given] a) clay soil b) loam

soil c) sand



--- Page 136 ---
Explain that soil is a mixture of different types of soil grains/particles in different
proportions. There are three main soil types: sand, clay and loam.

Clay soil is mainly made up of clay particles which are very small and fine. The
soil forming anthills are made up of clay soil.

e Sandy soil is mainly made up of sand particles which are a little larger than
clay particles. The soil at the bottom or dry river beds is usually sandy sail.

e Loam soil is a mixture of clay and sand particles as well as decaying plants
and animal matter

Soil properties/Properties of soil

A property is what a substance looks like, what it feels like and how it behaves.

Activity 3

Work in a group

1. You will investigate four different properties of the three kinds of soil:

the colour.

» the texture (what it feels like).

« if it contains air (this is called aeration).

« if it allows water to pass through it (this is called drainage).

« if it contains dead decaying plant and animal material (humus).

Collect different types of soil. Your teacher will help you label them as clay soil,
sandy soil and loam soil.

Write your observations in a table.

What colour is the clay soil?

What colour is the sandy soil?

What colour is the loam soil?

Rub clay soil between your fingers. What does it feel like? Clay soil feels smooth.

Rub sandy soil between your fingers. What does it feel like? Sandy soil feels

rough.

Rub loam soil between your fingers. What does it feel like? Loam soil feels partly

rough and partly smooth.

8. Put any kind of soil in a three transparent plastic or glass jam jar and add water
to the soil. Stir the soil and water mixture with a stick. Observe what happens.
Can you see any bubbles coming out of the soil? The bubbles show that there
is air in the soil.

9. Cut three plastic bottles in half and place the top half upside down into the

lower half as shown in Figure 9.6. Place a paper towel in the top half and fill it

coh =

N



--- Page 137 ---
with clay soil. Pour water onto the soil and measure
how long the water takes to travel through the soil
and into the bottom half of the bottle.

9. Repeat this experiment using sandy soil and
then loam soil.

10. Which soil lets the water through the quickest?
You should have found that sandy soil lets water
through the quickest then loam soil and then clay
soil. Sandy soil therefore has the best drainage.

Figure 9.6 Water drains through soil
Record your observations in a table like this:

Property

Clay soil has small fine particles. It is often rich in colour that is dark colours such
as black, redish brown. Clay soil allows little air in it and it also allows little water to
pass through it.

Sandy soil has large rough particles. It is light in colour, that is, beige and some-
times even white. Sand allows a lot of air in it and water also passes through sand
easily.

Loam soil is a mixture of small and large soil particles. It has both smooth and a
rough texture. Loam soil allows both air and water to pass through it. It has good
drainage.

. Name the three types of sail.

. Explain how sandy soil is different to clay soil?
. Describe the properties of loam soil.

. How can we determine if soil contains air?

. Which type of soil has the best drainage?



--- Page 138 ---
Pottery

We can use clay soil to make a clay body. A clay body is the clay mixture that is
prepared and used to make a clay model.

In Topic 5 Design and technology you learned how to prepare clay soil for
making a clay body that you used to make a clay model.

Activity 4

1. Collect some clay soil from an anthill and make a clay body using the
instructions on page 87.

2. Make a clay model of a fruit (for example a banana or an apple) and a clay
model of a small animal (for example an earthworm or a snail).

Exercise B
. The type of soil which is made up of very small and fine soil particles is called

A. clay soil B. sandy soil C. loam soil D. rocks

. A mixture of sandy soil and clay soil will produce
A. sandy soil B. loam soil C. clay soil D. mud

is a property of soil that tells us that it might contain air/how much air

it contains
A. Colour B. Texture C. Aeration D. Drainage

. The soil with the biggest soil particles is called

. The soil with the smallest soil particles and can be used to make pottery models
is called

. The soil which is made of clay and sand particles as well as bits of decaying
dead plants and animals is called

Summary

« Soil consists of small stones, small soil particles like sand and clay, bits of
decaying dead plants and small animals It also contains air and water.

« Rocks are broken down to form soil particles. This process is called weathering.

« The three types of soil are clay soil, sandy soil and loam soil.

« Properties of soil are: colour, texture, it contains air (aeration), it allows water
to pass through (drainage).

« Clay soil can be used to make clay bodies to create pottery models.



--- Page 139 ---
Objectives

You should be able to:
1. identify plant parts
2. relate plant parts to their function.

What are the names of some of the ¢ flowering plant anchor absorb
plants that you know? ZL

reproduce pollen

Parts of a plant

There are many different kinds of plants. Flowering plants are plants that have
flowers. There are different kinds of flowering plants. All lowering plants have the
same structure/consist of the same parts. Parts of a flowering plant are: roofs,
stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds.

A tomato plant is a flowering plant. Look at the picture in Figure 9.7 that shows the
different parts of a tomato plant. The roots grow downward into the soil. The stem
grows upwards above the ground. The stem, support/hold the leaves and flowers.
The flowers of the tomato plant reproduces and forms the fruit called tomatoes.
Inside the fruit are the seeds. When we cut the tomato in half, we can see the
seeds inside the fruit.

Figure 9.7 The parts of a plant |



--- Page 140 ---
Activity 5

. Find a small plant such as a weed in your school grounds or on your way to
school. Pull up the plant gently, making sure that you have also pulled the

roots out of the sail.

. Wash the plant to get the soil off the roots then draw a picture of the plant.

. Label all the parts of your plant that you can see. (Your plant may not have
flowers or fruit.)

Functions of the parts of a plant

You have learned that flowering plants consist of roots, stems, leaves, flowers,
fruit and seeds. Each part of a plant has its own use that helps the plant to grow
and to produce fruit.

The roots of a plant anchor it in the
ground. This means that they hold

the plant in position and prevent it
from falling over.

Roots also absorb water and nutrients
from the soil. This means that they

take in water and nutrients.
The stem holds the leaves and the
flowers above the ground.

Leaves need to be above the ground
up in the air to absorb sunlight. Flowers
need to be above the ground for the
plant to reproduce. To reproduce
means to make fruits and seeds.

The leaves make food for the plant.

Leaves

Leaves need sunlight to make food.



--- Page 141 ---
The flowers are the parts of the plant
used for reproduction. Flowers form
the fruit and seeds.

Many flowers are brightly coloured to
attract insects such as bees. Some
flowers, such as the flowers of grass
plants are small and not brightly
coloured.

The fruit contains seeds. Seeds can
grow into new plants (offspring).

Work with your partner.

Look at the picture of a sunflower plant.
Take it in turns to name each part of the
plant labelled A — D and then explain what
the function is of that part of the plant
(what it is used for).

Figure 9.9 Different parts of a sunflower plant

Exercise C

Choose the correct word from the word box to complete each of the following
sentences.

1. The supports leaves and flowers, holding them up above the ground.
2. The makes food for the plant.



--- Page 142 ---
. The holds the plant in the soil and absorbs water and nutrients

from the soil.
4. The is used for reproduction and making seeds.
5. The contains seeds.
6. The grows into a new plant.

Activity 7

In pairs study a certain plant

Go outside and look at it
Give feedback on its plant parts and their function.

Summary

» The parts of a flowering plants are: roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and
seeds.

Each part of a plant has a different function.

Roots hold the plant in the soil and abosorbs water and nutrients.

Stems hold the leaves and flowers above the ground.

Leaves make food for the plant, when they have enough sunlight.
Flowers reproduce to form fruits and seeds.



--- Page 143 ---
(ED) Animals

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. classify animals

2. outline characteristics of invertebrates
3. state examples of invertebrates

4. identify useful and harmful insects.

What are the names of some of the [ 3 classifying invertebrates

animals that you know? vertebrate backbone
characteristics pollinate
polluted diarrhoea

There are many different kinds of animals. In order for us to organise all the different
kinds of animals on earth, scientists have worked out a system that we use to sort/
group them. >

We can group animals that are similar to each other in appearance (how they
look) together. This is called classifying animals.

The features of living things that make them similar or different to other living
things are called characteristics. Animals are classified according to similar
characteristics.

Animals form part of the Animal kingdom. Animals are classified into two big
groups. The vertebrates and the invertebrates. Examples of vertebrate animals are
cows, horses, cats and dogs. These animals have a backbone or spinal column

and bones.
backbone

Figure 9.10 A cow has a backbone and spinal column.



--- Page 144 ---
Invertebrate animals do not have a backbone or spinal column.

Characteristics of invertebrates

Examples of invertebrates are shown in Figure 9.11. Write down the name of each
of these the animals.

Figure 9.11 Different invertebrate animals

What characteristics do all invertebrates have?

All invertebrate animals do not have bones or a backbone (spinal column). This
is what makes them different from other animals that you know that have bones
and a backbone, for example, cows and pigeons.

There are many different kinds of invertebrates. Look at the pictures of the different
kinds of invertebrates shown in the table and read about how their different
characteristics.



--- Page 145 ---
In which part of the table would you put the millipede?

Table 9.1 Characteristics of invertebrates

Characteristics Examples of these kinds of invertebrates
of different kinds
invertebrates

Some invertebrates earthworm
have a soft body made

up of segments.

The body is filled with a

liquid.

Some invertebrates
have a hard body with

jointed | .
many jointed legs Pp
~—

centipede
\
{

Some invertebrates
have a soft body with
tentacles on their head.

Some have a hard shell.

Insects

The largest group of invertebrate animals are the insects. Look at Table 9.1
The example of an insect in the table is a ladybird.


--- Page 146 ---
There are many other kinds of insects. All insects have 6 legs or three pairs of legs.
Some insects, for example, the ladybird has wings and some insects like the ant
does not have wings.

Figure 9.12 shows some of these different kinds of insects.

Which ones have wings?

bee

dung bettle

~ Housefly

mosquito

Figure 9.12 Different kinds of insects

Activity 8

1. Explain why insects are invertebrates?

. Draw pictures of three insects from Figure 9.12.

. Collect different kinds of insects from the school grounds and home. Place the
insects in a box.

. Use a magnifying lens to observe the insects.

. What can you see?

. How many different kinds of insects did you/the class find?

. Write down the names of the different kinds of insects that you found. Write
down where the insect was found. Ask your teacher for help if you don't know
the names of all your different insects.



--- Page 147 ---
Insects can be grouped as useful to humans or harmful to humans.

Useful insects

Some insects are useful to humans.

Bee

Bees are very useful insects. They make
honey in their hives. Humans eat honey.

Can you see that the honey comb in the
picture is full of honey?

Bees help to pollinate flowers. You learned
about pollination in the last unit.

Pollen is produced by the male part of a
flower and it needs to get to the female part
of another flower. When this happens the
flower can then make seeds and fruit.

The pollen needs to be transferred to other
flowers for the plant toreproduce. The process
of transferring pollen from one flower to
anotheris called pollination. When pollination
takes place the flower can develop/form fruit
and seeds. Humans eat the fruits and seeds.
Figure 9.14. Bees pollinate flowers Bees help to pollinate plant crops.

Dragon fly

Dragon flies live close to water.

Young dragonflies, called larvae do not have
wings and they live in fresh water in streams and
rivers. The presence of dragonfly larvae in a river
indicate the health of the river.

Figure 9.15. Young dragonflies live in clean water

When the water is clean there are many young dragonflies. There are very few
young dragonflies in dirty or polluted water.

The number of dragonflies visiting a river can tell us how healthy the river is and
whether it is safe for us to use the water. 0



--- Page 148 ---
Harmful insects

The housefly

Some insects are harmful to humans. Flies

can pick up harmful germs when they feed
on rotten food, dead animals or animal waste.
You learned about harmful germs that

cause disease in Topic 1: Health and safety.

When the flies land on our fresh food they Figure 9.16. Houseflies spread germs
bring these harmful germs with them. When

we eat this food we swallow the harmful

germs and can get diarrhoea.

The mosquito

Mosquitos are harmful because they spread the disease called malaria. Many
people die from malaria.

Mosquitoes feed on our blood. When a
mosquitoes bites a person who is suffering
from malaria, the mosquito sucks up the
germs that cause the disease.

The mosquito can then spread these germs
to the other people that it bites.

Figure 9.17 Mosquitoes spread malaria

Exercise D

Say whether the following statements are true or false.
1. A mosquito is a useful insect. True /False

2. We need bees to pollinate our crops. True /False

3. Houseflies spread malaria. True /False

4. Young dragonflies live in rivers. True /False

5. Houseflies make honey. True /False

Summary

Animals without backbones are called invertebrates.

There are many different kinds of invertebrates.

Insects are invertebrates.

There are some insects useful to humans, such as bees and dragonflies.

There are some insects harmful to humans, such as house flies and mosquitoes.



--- Page 149 ---
Glossary

particle a very small part of something

decay the rotting or breakdown of something

weathering the breaking down of rocks into smaller pieces

property what a substance looks like, feels like and how it behaves

texture what something feels like

aeration the mixing of air with something

drainage - the movement of water through something

clay body - is the clay that is used to make a clay model

flowering plant - a plant that has flowers

anchor - to hold something in position

absorb - to take in or suck up something

reproduce - to make young ones

pollen - a powder substance made by flowers to reproduce

classifying - grouping according to similar characteristics

invertebrates animals without backbones or spinal column

backbone bones that form the spine along the back of an animal

characteristics - the features of something that helps us to recognize/classify/
identify it

pollinate to carry pollen from one flower to another

polluted made dirty or unclean

diarrhoea a runny tummy

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

When we look at something through a hand lens it becomes :

A. smaller B. transparent C. bigger D. a different shape
Large rocks can be broken into smaller rocks by the following activities
except .

A. roots growing through rocks

B. jumping over the rock

C. flowing water

D. changes in temperature

Which part of a plant absorbs water from soil?

A. leaf B. stem C. root D. flower

Which part of a plant is responsible for producing seeds and fruits?

A. flower B. root C. leaf D. stem



--- Page 150 ---
A. leaf B. stem C. root D. fruit

Which part of a plant holds it up?

A. leaf B. root C.stem D. fruit

Which part of a plant is responsible for making food?

A. flower B. stem C. seed D. leaf

An animal without a backbone is called a

A. vertebrate B. invertebrate C.cow D. harmful

Which animal has a soft body that is filled with a liquid?

A. spider B. centipede C. insect D. earthworm
. Which of the following is a useful insect, fo humans?

Which part of a plant contains seeds?

A. dragonfly  B. house fly C. snail D. mosquito [10]

Structured questions

Name three different types of soil.
Explain how soil is formed from rocks?

Describe the function of the roots of a plant?
What is the main characteristic of an invertebrate?
Why is it important for humans to keep/nof kill bees?



--- Page 151 ---
Sustainable resource management

Figure 10.1 Kariba dam

Introduction

cvery day of our lives we use things. Some of the things are used up and others
can be used again and again. Others can be used once and they cannot be
used anymore. After being used they have to be thrown away as waste. Everyday
as we learn, play and work we use many things. These things produce waste.

(Unit 25 | Sustainable resource management

Objectives

You should be able to:
1. identify resources
2. classify resources.

In Unit 4: Electronics we learned that resources sustainable resource
management

oe

some of the electricity we use in
Zimbabwe is generated at Kariba
hydropower station. Kariba Dam assist
all the people in Zimbabwe to get
electricity. It is a national resource.



--- Page 152 ---
We call the things that we use resources. Resources are the things that we need
or want to make our lives better.

Land is a resource. We can use the land as a field to grow crops, as a grazing field
for animals, as a yard where we build a house or sell it to get money. If we sell our
land , we will have none left. It is better to grow crops on the land to sell for money,
or to build a house on the land and leave it for your children and grandchildren as
an inheritance. This means we always have food and money and won't starve or
become poor from the land that we have kept.

It is important to take care of our resources so that we will still have them in the
future. This is called sustainable resource management. A sustainable resource is
a resource that we do not use up or destroy.

Resources are classified into natural resources and man-made resources.

Figure 10.2 Caring for our environment means caring for our resources

Some resources are natural resources. A natural resource is part of the natural
environment.

Examples of natural resources are:

wildlife

forests

rivers

land

e minerals

Look at the pictures of the different types of natural resources shown in Table 10.1
read the information to find out how we can use each of them and why they

are important.


--- Page 153 ---
How we use the natural
resource

Wildlife is a resource because
foreign tourists come to our
country to see these animals in
game reserves and they bring
money that they spend in our
country.

Type of natural resource

wildlife

Some wild animals such as
wildebeest, antelope and kudu
can also be kept for food.

Forests are a resource because
they consist of large trees and
many different kinds of plants
and animals.

We can use the wood from
the trees for fires and making
furniture.

We can use the plants in the
forest for food and medicine.

Rivers are a resource because
they provide us with water.

We need the water in rivers for
drinking and washing and for
Our Crops.

Rivers are also the home of
many different kinds of fish
which we can eat.



--- Page 154 ---
Land is a resource because we
need it to build houses, villages
and cities.

We also need land for
agriculture - to grow our crops
and for our livestock.

Land is used for wildlife and
forests.

Minerals are a resource
because they provide our
country with metals like copper
to make things that are useful
to us. Power lines are made
from copper cables. Fuel like
coal provides us with electricity.

Minerals

Gemstones like the diamonds
are exported and they bring in
foreign currency.

We get most of the minerals
that are found in Zimbabwe
through mining.

Make a list of the natural resources found in Zimbabwe. Collect pictures of
natural resources and make a poster to display in class.

2. What natural resources do you have near your home or your school?
How do people in your community use this natural resources?



--- Page 155 ---
Man-made resources

A man-made resource is something that we use that is made by humans. We use
many different kinds of man-made resources every day.

Examples of man-made resources are:

* dams
* roads
* rubber
* plastic

We need dams for water and to make
electricity. In Zimbabwe we have many
dams in farms that are used for irrigation.

Figure 10.4 Kariba dam is man-made

We need roads to transport people and
goods from one part of the country to another.

Figure 10.5 Roads are man-made
We make rubber from a substance that
we get from rubber trees. Rubber is used
to make tyres and rubber gloves.

Figure 10.6 Rubber is used to make tyres and rubber gloves

We make plastic in factories from coal or oil. Plastic is used to make plastic bottles
and plastic tables and chairs.

Man-made resources cost money to
produce and are expensive to replace.
If we care for our man-made resources
and fix them when they are broken it
will cost a lot less money than trying to
replace them.

Figure 10.7 Plastic is used to make bottles and chairs


--- Page 156 ---
Activity 2

plastic dam river land mineral rubber forest wildlife roads

Draw a table like the one shown. Write
the names of all the natural resources from resources resources

the word box in the left hand column and

the names of all the man-made resources

from the word box in the right hand column.

Make a list of other natural and man-made resources you can think of. Add
the names of all the natural resources in your list to the left hand column and
the names of all the man-made resources to the right hand column of your

table.

Exercise A

Say whether the following statements are true or false.
. A zebra is a natural resource. True /False
. We can get food from rivers. True /False
. Buildings are natural resources. True /False
. Plastic is made from rubber. True /False
. We can get electricity from coal. True /False

Summary

« Natural resources such as wildlife, forests, rivers, land and minerals are part
of the natural environment.

« Man-made resources such as dams, roads, rubber and plastic are made by
people.

« |tisimportant to take care of our natural resources.



--- Page 157 ---
(TIED sources of waste

Objective

You should be able to:
1. state sources of waste.

Flashback : Key words
What did you last throw away? We ¢ waste sources electronic
call things that we throw away waste. 7 gadget poison recycled

compost

Sources of waste

When we use resources we produce waste. Most of the products we use in our
everyday life produce waste).

In groups, look at your classroom.
How is waste produced in your classroom?
How do you dispose of your classroom waste.

There are various sources of waste. Waste can come from:
* household waste

* plant and animal waste

* industrial waste

* electronic waste

Household waste

Families that live in houses produce waste all the time.
This waste produced in homes is called household waste.

Plastics and cardboard from packaging,
carrier bags, left over foods and broken furniture
are often thrown away.

This waste produced in homes is called household waste

Figure 10.8 Household waste

Plant and animal waste
Plants and animals produce waste. This waste


--- Page 158 ---
can be useful. We can make compost with plant
and animal waste. Compost can be added to
the soil we use for growing crops. Compost

enriches the soil which produces healthy plants. 4

Figure 10.9 Use plant and animal waste to make compost

Activity 4

Do you make compost at home?

Find out how to make compost
Report back to the class
How does compost utilize plant and animal waste?

Industrial waste

Industry produces waste. Many of these
wastes are poisonous and harm the
environment. Figure 10. 10 shows harmful
wastes entering a river where it can poison
fish and the people who drink the water.

How can these wastes harm the
environment and harm people?

Figure 10.10 Waste from industries can damage the environment

Electronic gadgets

When electronic gadgets/devices like computers
or cell phones stop working or are too out of date
to work any more people throw them away. This is
a big problem as they can poison the water or the
land that they are thrown into. It is much better to
try to fix electronic gadgets or take them fo a place
where the parts can be recycled.

Figure 10.11 Electronic gadgets can be waste

What electronic gadgets have you seen being thrown away?


--- Page 159 ---
Activity 5

. Name four sources of waste.
. Make a list of all the different examples of waste that you can see on the

school grounds and on your way home.
. Tick the examples of waste on your list that can be harmful to people.
. Put an R next to the examples of waste on your list that can be reused/
recycled or made into compost.

Summary

» Electronic gadgets, houses, industry, plants and animals are all sources of
waste.

Glossary

resources - the things that we need or want to make our lives better.
sustainable resource

management: - making sure that that we do not use up or destroy

resources
waste - things that we throw away
sources - where things come from
electronic gadget  - electronic devices
poison a substance that can kill plants, animals or people
recycled - used to make something else or for another purpose
compost - mixture of dead, decaying plant and animal waste



--- Page 160 ---
End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice

1. A resource that is not made by human is called a
A. natural resource
B. man-made resource
C. useful resource
D. people's resource
2. The following are natural resources except .

A. minerals B. wood C. building D. land
3. The following are man-made resources except .
A. buildings B. land C. tables D. roads

4. Resources that are made by humans are called
A. man-made resources
B. natural resources
C. manufactured resources
D. pure resources
5. Waste produced by people in their homes is called
A. electronic waste
B. household waste
C. industrial waste
D. plant and animal waste
6. Which of the following is a natural resource?

A. road B. minerals C.dam D. buildings
7. What resource is needed to make electricity?

A. dam B. rubber C. wildlife D. road
8. We get water from .

A. rivers B. roads C. forests D. waste

9. What type of waste is compost made from?
A. electronic gadgets
B. plants and animals
C. industries
D. plastic and rubber
10. Why is it not good to throw waste material on the streets?
A it can harm people
B. it is a natural resource
C. itis healthy
D. it is nice to look at [10]



--- Page 161 ---
Structured questions

. Give two examples of natural resources.
. Give two examples of man-made resources.

. Name one natural resource that is found near your school or community. [1]
. Give two examples of things you use at home that are man-made. [2]
. Name three sources of waste. [3]

Unit 27 End of year assessment test

Paper 1

Answer all questions
Choose the correct answer.
1. Which of the following foods will give you energy?

A. potatoes and bread B. eggs and fish

C. cabbage and spinach C. meat and water
2. Which of these is not a germ which can cause a disease?

A. virus B. bacteria C. protozoa D. dust
3. A tool that we tan use to cook food in the kitchen is called a

A. spoon B. plate C. tin opener D. pot
4. A solid fuel commonly used in rural areas in Zimbabwe is

A. wood B. petrol C. paraffin D. gas

5. If a magnet is brought near a plastic cup
A. the cup will be attracted by the magnet
B. the cup will not be attracted by the magnet
C. the cup will become very hot
D. the cup will move away from the magnet

6. An example of an electronic device is a

A. spoon B. hammer C. cellphone D. magnet
7. A natural material commonly used for making models or pottery is

A. metal B. clay C. plastic D. cotton
8. The following material can be used to decorate models except

A. paint B. bread C. bottle tops D. seeds
9. If water is poured onto a hard surface that is not flat, it

A. rises B. flows C. stays where itis D. infiltrates
10. When water is poured onto loose soil that has been dug, it ;

‘A. rises B. infiltrates C. flows D. stays where it is
11. Which of the following is a natural source of water?

A.-ocean B. borehole C. tap D. dam



--- Page 162 ---
12. When it is not cloudy and rainy and the sun is shining we say the weather is

A.rainy B. cloudy C. sunny D. cold
13. People are wearing jerseys and coats and sitting next to fire places and
heaters. What kind of weather is this?

A. itis hot B. it is cold C. itis windy D. itis sunny
14. Which is not a landform?
A. ariver B. a hill C. a plain D. a bridge
15. Which soil type has both large and small particles?
A. clay sois B. sandy soil C. red soil D. loam soil
16. Water passes very quickly through .
A. clay soll B loam soil C. mu D. sandy soil
17. Which part of the plant is responsible for absorbing water from the soil?
A. leaf B. root C. stem D. flower
18. The is the part of the plant which absorbs sunlight and makes food for
the plant.
A. root B. stem C. flower D. leaf
19. The is a very useful insect to humans because it indicates us how
healthy a river is.
A. housefly B. dragonfly C. bee ~~ D. mosquito
20. The is a very useful insect to humans that pollinates flowers and makes
honey.

A. housefly B. dragon fly C. mosquito D. bee
21. An animal without a backbone is called

A. a vertebrate B. a plant

C. an invertebrate D. a bird
22. Which of the following animals is an insect?

-A.a bee B. a snail

C.aworm D. a chicken
23. Important things that we use in everyday life are called

A. resources B. food C. landforms D. rocks
24. is an example of a man-made resource.

A. rubber B. forests C. rivers D. land
25. All are examples of natural resources except .

A. wildlife B. land C. rivers D. road [25]

Paper 2

1. a) If you were to pour water onto some sandy soil and some clay soil, which
soil would water drain through very quickly?

b) How could you find out that soil contains air?

c) If you rub wet clay soil between your fingers how does it feel?

d) If you rub wet sand soil between your fingers how does it feel?



--- Page 163 ---
e) If you mix dead plants, sandy soil and and clay soil what type of soil do
you get? [5]
a) Draw a plant and label the following parts: root, leaf and stem.

b) What is the solution that is given to someone suffering from diarrhoea?
Which insect spreads malaria? [5]

a) Name two animals that are invertebrates
b) Name an insect that is useful to humans.
c) Which two natural landforms are made of water? [5]

. a) Name any two sources of electricity.

Pb) Which two electronic devices are used in communication.
c) How does electricity get from Kariba Power Station to homes in

Zimbabwe? [5]

Figure 10.12 A plastic chair

a) The chair is made of which material?

b) What is the process of purifying water called?

c) Name one type of natural resource.

d) Name any two sources of waste. [5]



--- Page 164 ---


