--- Page 1 ---
~~ |collage press

Ventures Primary |
~cience and Technology >

|

R. Mbiriyokure | Learner's B 09 ,

C. Verenizhu

F ee


--- Page 2 ---
yee



--- Page 3 ---
AGS cliferent parts and needs to be token care of. These include ihe
NGS. eyes and ears, armpils and pubic area.

cavity decay dentist digest

ent types of teeth found in the mouth and they have different
6re-on important part of the human bod yas such they should be
to avoid tooth decay, Tooth decay can be caused by what we eat
ol one eots or drinks is known as a diet, A balanced diet is eoling

fains all the food nutrients, Eating food that lacks these nutrients
6 body catching deficiency diseases, A disease is particular iliness
body. People should also take care of themselves to avoid geting
nis Coan occur at home or school al any time. lt is important to be
uch dangers in order to keep sole. Safety con be achieved By following
home and school.

ind their functions

model of human teeth. Observe it well. It will help you to know more.



--- Page 4 ---
Figure |.) Mode! of human feel
Types of teeth

in human beings. These ore thi
‘and molars. They de nat look the same an dtheyhaue
ult OF a grown Up human being has a total of 32 tees ht
very Important because they help us te Chew food and make it eq ‘of
'0 digest is to break down food in o-smalier pieces.

Incisors

ie incisor teeth are eight, They are found in front and at the centre of you
Four ore on the top anc four ore ot the bottom, They re shaped spake
2 youre et shatp ends. The incisors are used to chop, CUt or bite you
@ YOUNG one is Growing, the incisors are the first to grow. !
Canines :
These are the four pointed teeth on either side of yourincise
Sd aopptom. They are the sharpest teeth in yourmouth. 1
and ripping food apa, !

oft SA ea they ore
one’ four are.at the bottom. they are also



--- Page 5 ---
fram the incisors and the

th, The premolars have a different shape
eeth i . They ore wed

36th are bigger and stronger and they have ridge

efh are called primary molars but they are also known as deciduous
dutts have hwelve molars, Six are at the bottom and six are at the lop. The
nger.and wider than the premolars and they are stronger. These
ghest, They work with your tongue at the back of the mouth. They
iP food so that it becomes ready for swallowing, Swallowing food
food from mouth fo stomach,

ge of twenty (20). adults develop more molars in the back of the mouth.
one in each comer of the mouth. These four are called the wisdom

are used to chew tough foods, Somme people have them pulled out

enfists to avoid crowding of the teeth, A dentist iso person who cares for
sof the teeth.

D row one of the incisors, canines, premolars and molars teeth,
Describe where the teeth ore found In the rnouth,

What ore these teeth used for?

(a) incisors (6)conines (cc) premolars

(qj motors

B Activity

1 $e ”



--- Page 6 ---
Foch group wilt imagine thal it is the most important grou

[ 2,
mouth. Explain why you think: YOur gra! of teethi 8 Them
3, Write yourreasens in your rough book and use them to pre
ses, a : |
j4. The debate session it done after group discussions.
§. Your teacher wilt give you f each group at the

fill in the table below about the human teeth | that you have le

Where are they Whotare By

Name of teeth How mony are
used for?

they ? found? —

Line cis ors

rear TOI

' Exercise B
||. An adult has a total of __ teeth.

A. 42 B. 32 Cc. 22 D. 52
2. The following teeth are found at the centre of the mouth.
A. premolars 5. molars ¢. conines D. inicise

| 2 Why are fhe molars used to grind and mush up food?

A. because they are share

B. becouse they are long and white

C. because they ore stronger and wider

D. because they ore different from others

14. The following teeth are also colled bicuspids and they are found on the:

of fhe mouth, ——

| A, incisors 8, canines C. ‘premolars r

9. Why are the molars teeth sometimes pulled out by the dentist?

A. itis done to improve the mouth =e

B. ifs done to avoid over-crowding of teeth

C. itis done te allow other teeth fo grow again

| OD. itis done to allow food to be swallowed,

| 6. Which teeth are used to.chop, cut or bite your food?.

7. What are canine teeth used for?

| 8. ae sh reason feleshll ile dihead ) are the largest
thece two. ie ime



--- Page 7 ---
gure 1.3 (a) odult decaying teeth

: P will Invite a local health officer ta feach you abou! humen |
| 4 ASK ony question and the health offeer will help to explain clearly.

Me teacher is to bring humoen teeth types: vides ond mogazines for learners |
founcton forexample, —

“Porleamers tawaich, enjoy andleam, Available trom: nitps:www.youtube. |

-Gom/watch?y=XdkO@Teléc

\& Write ao short poem explaining whatwould happ
Tooth Decay

Our teeth look very strana, but If we do not take good core of them, They can
decay. Decay is when sOMeHINg goes bad, if our teeth dacay, we must visit a
Gentist who will help us to stop tooth decay. We use our teeth to eat food, so we
MUST Ook after them well, If we fail fo look after our teeth, they will decay and we
Con end up losing them. When a tooth decays it ends up having a cavity which is
@ hole in the decayed part of ihe tooth,

Young children have what ore

en ifone-hasne teeth at all,

Colled milk teeth. After some time, usually of he
Oge of six (4) or seven [7) the milk teeth fall off and new and pennanent teeth
grow. If you lose permonent teeth, they will not grow again, 50 we must look affer
Our teeth for the rest of our lives.

ery n\n

enprgguel™ |

(6) child decaying teeth

_ What is tooth decay?

Our teeth are coated by a substance called enamel. Enamel & he
_ shown in Figure 1.4.

gels dest



--- Page 8 ---


--- Page 9 ---
a
+. When the Snamne! & attacked. tooth decoy sfarts,
a up in your mouth, ican abe couse gum disease which

4, When Pegue busi
aMock: our tasth.

What is gum disease?

Bacteria in our mouth c an COWSe GUM cisecse, When one has gum disease, his
or her Sums become red, «wollen ar 14 hey bleed easily. you have gum dsease
yOu should weit the ec Jentist

: Activity 5 5)

eipetinent

What you need
hove electricity). or a gas stove or firewood,

fA small pot. electric stove (if you
ene &93, Cold water, vinegor (vinegar an acid) and a jar.

| Procedure
(ft. Boil the ego.
Feel the bolled egg.

Feel your own teeth.
Talk about the hardiness of the boiled egg and the teeth,

I
2:
=
4.
)o. is the horciness of ihe teeth similar to that of the boiled egg?

[o. Now put the @99 In a Container with vinegar and make sure it sinks in the
Fr

8.

vinegar.
Leave the egg in the vinegar overnight,
What is likely fo happen to the egg fomorow? (predict).

Results of the experiment
Open the jar where you placed the egg yesterday.

2. What has happened to the egg?
. Does it still look thesame?
What changes do you see?
We used the e inegar as an example of a human teeth. The acid in
shea broke down, the egg shell. The bactetia in the plaque fo n our|
)can break down enamel on our teeth.



--- Page 10 ---
Remember
Before you go fosleer, donot forgette brush your teeth wilh a fivoride(lac
Remeniber whal happened to the egg zin the experiment,

Ways of preventing tooth decay
fo prevent is to stop something from hoppening. Teeth can be preventec

decaying by the following;
Brush your teeth at least twice a day wilh q toothpaste that con
Brush teeth otter each meal and before going to bed,

Clean between your teeth with dental floss.

Lock offer your teeth and gums well.

Avoid smn aking ond drinking alcohel.

See your dentist offen. to check your teeth.

Also Use-sall er soda ta brush your teeth if toothpaste Is not avaitab ple.

a

hs,

Do net share the same toothbrush.

Activity 6)



--- Page 11 ---
Exerci

LT, Ne The SubstOnO@ Heat atlocke (he ere! on cour bee th,

. oa incisor B, canines . Seenoleirs (>, plengyue
2 Ba sign a! tooth decay
A feothache B. rucsiies t Pbcagyiiee (0, lige

3, Identity the mane of the jeran honpOniiihe for oun lowly wher vide Pcrve

AL ire A, doctor C, cent D, sungerar
4 Whol does bacteria in the plaque precduee? |
A. woter B liquiels C. acids DB; salt
1S. identity the kinds of foods Heat cause fecith claciy,
| A. protein giving foods A. Sfharehy fooels wilh: sugpars
C. ealclum ane mineral sally D0, prolbciive laocs

Draw @ looth OfAd lobel lie enone,

When should you clean your teeth?

Name the imporoant substance that should ie be Ina loolhpcste,
2. How is cavity formed on your teal?

10. What would: you do if you tee Thal yeu have a gum disecaiea?

bs

Summary

* People have different teeth which are called the inelors, Ihe canines, the
bramolars and the molars.

Teeth have differen! shapes dnd purposes,

* We use our teeth to chew our food in arcer to make It ready fer digestion.

* Teeth are coated by enamel which is a hard substance,

* The bacteria that is in the plaque, produces acids thal alack tooth anamel
causing the tooth to decay,

* Tooth decay can be prevented, ifwe take good care of our teeth.

* We must avoid eating sweet food and brush our teeth at least two times a day.



--- Page 12 ---
Unit2 Diet

‘In this unit you will:
1. identify food nutrients

(2. describe food nunents and their functions in the bocly
4, explain balanced diet

4. list diseases caused by lock of certain nutrients.

Flashback

Different foods come from different sources, Food gives us energy, bolids
bodies and protects us against diseases.

What is a diet?
A diet refers to the kinds of food thal a person, animal, or community usu
What Is a balanced diet?

A balanced diet is o way of eating all of the nutri
right quantities in order to be healthy.

> gue eles aac anism 5 ee UW
om hpiewe einen Nutrients‘are found n differe
ferent types of nutrients:

ae pple: (c) Fats
(g) water

f food ert in the bod

at



--- Page 13 ---
aa eae oe verraatios The following are foods that give us Garbehyeiratee: efesiry
sicbademaedieckeny Brains ike bread, ree ond Cereal, starchy vegotables like potctlies,
SUSIOTY SWEET ONG cise maze. cy con,

Study Figure 1.4 anc Dame (he feeds thet you oon se

poloines cw
Figure |.4 Foods that Provide carbohydrates
Proteins

Proteins ore body building hutnents: These inclucia eos. milk, fish, beans, chicken,
nuts and pork. Protein is mainly used for growth and body repair,
Look at the kinds of foods that give us proteins

mala

frorn the Figure 1.7.

Figure 1.7 Foods thal provide proteins

Fats
Fats are one of the nutrients that give the body some energy. Fats fron fish, nuts,

_ avocados and vegetables are very healthy. Fats trom red meat are nol healthy,
_ Fal supplies the body with energy.

_ Study Figure 1.8 showing foods that are high in fat.



--- Page 14 ---
butter fatty reat cnems
Aigure |.6 Foods thot provide foals =

Fats provide warmth te the body. Fals aise help to protect our bodies fromy

Mineral Salts

Mineral salts naturally come from inorganic substances that are exlractee fram,
below Nhe Ground surface. These include sodium, calcium, ammonium pl losphale,
PeTassiuM, Magnesium, chlorine, sulphur and phosphorus. Sociurn 5 1he soi fixayy
we €o! every day. Mineral sets help the body to function normally. af

cabbage

spinach
Figure 1.7 Foods thal provide mineral salts
Vitamins

Vitamins are organic components in food that help our bodies to Grow, Vite
are used in many different ways inside your body. We get vitamins fram differe
foods. Examples of vitamins are Vitamin C, Vitamin 8 and many others, -

ds Gan give us vilan

sae By
|

Wit Fae

Figure 1.10 shows foods that provide vitamins, All these foo
Vitamins protect the body from disenses:



--- Page 15 ---
Fibre are the parts of grains, fruits an

Free SHA ehicaess ae TTS OPH
gested by the body, Fibre helps
COUSES If to move

e06tobles that contain cellulase and ore
ohh helps Ihe intestines to Gisorb water to build stool
more quickly throwgh the coten,

(
|

: poure:3.4 1 Foods that provide fibre
Water

ater Is Overy important nutrient needed by the body. We get water from both
fluids we drink ond the foods we eat. Water also assists in removing weste

Gucts from the body. Waste Products come out of the body as stool, sweat
Unre,

iy :
What is a balanced diet?

2 .bolanced diet is away of eating food with all of the ight nutrients thal your Dody
ineecis in order to be healthy. Everyone's body is different and often Individuals

quire a different amount and type of nutrients, We must eat food wilh all the
ferent nutrients that we have leamt about.

importance of a balanced diet

A bolonced diet helps our bodies to function Properly. It is important for proper
and development of the body. I! gives the body warmth and energy to do

ltalso helps the bady to grow and repair body tissues.

| Activity 8 }

a.ona balanced diet

that you are a

mother or father at home. W
e your children within a week so that they can hav



--- Page 16 ---
Exercise D
Fill in the table below aind Write the exercise i in your! books.
| Nutrient
| Carbeal yore.
Protein
|
| Exercise E "
I. Bread, cereal, rice and pasta are good sources of
A. vitamins B. carbohydrates
C. fals DB. mineral salts
;}2. Meat, eggs and beans ore goodsourcesof  —_s«y;,
at carbohydrates B, forts Cc. mineral salts D. proteins:
ac Nome the food thal does not contain fat,
| A. cheese _B. butter C. avecade D, rice
|4. Which one of the following is a mineral salt?
A. milk 8. iodine C. avocado DB. fice
5. Waterhelps us to remove 7
A. sugar B. iron .-
(Cc. vitamins | D. waste products a
1.

16. What isa food nutrient?
Name two kinds of food that provide carbohydrates,

é
]8. Where do we get vitamins from? ff
fe Caine ine enn patumers diet, il



--- Page 17 ---
Lock of nutrients

Hs Important that one eats a belanced diet, This means thal one has to eal food
that contains carbohydrates, proteins. vitamins, mineral salts, fiore ancl fats, When
you do not have a bolanced diet you may suNer from diseases,

tock of nutrients Causes deficiency diseases. Same of the diseaves caused by
| Jack of certain nutrients are kwashiorkor, goitra and scurvy, These diseases CON
prevented when one eats.o botanced diet.

Kwashiorkor

4 Kwashiorkor 6 2 form of malnutrition. Malnutrition is lack of enough nutrition,

Kwashiokor is caused by o lack of proteins. There are symptoms that show if a
peson has kwashiorkor. To prevent sufferina trom kwashiorkor, you should eal
foods that contain proteins. These include fish, eggs, meat. beans, peas and ruts.

> The symptoms of kevashioreor include
Change in skin and hair colour to a rust colour and texture
Diarheoa

Faollure !o grow ond gain weight
Loss of weight

swelling feel and pot belly
Flaky rash

Fotique

Thin legs.

os |

ca

Ld

Pn

_ Goitre is the swelling of the neck resulting
coused By lack of lodine,

may include:

L. A visible swelling at the base of your
Neck that may be particularly obvious
when you shave or put on makeup

A tight feeling on your throat
Coughing |
Hoarseness

Difficulty in swallowing
Difficulty in breathing.

aT

an Pw

Figure 1.13 A person suffering trom goltre



--- Page 18 ---
scurvy
tito disease coused by a deficiency of vitamin Cc. It is characterjed bY sulle
bleeding gums and the opening Of previously healed wounds. ed:

Signs and symptoms of scurvy:
Feeling very tired

Feeling imtable

Poin in legs

Red spofs-on skin

Swollen gums

Joint pains

Lock.of appetite

High temperchune,

“lO Un et Ao =

" People need a good diet for them to be healthy,

= Food gives us different nutrients which are carbohydrates. proteins, fats,
Vitamins, fibre, water and mineral salts,

* The different nutrients help us to have a balanced cet.

* We need fo be careful about what we eat so that we can be healthy and
prevent diseases. .



--- Page 19 ---
icdervtity nee ponasitic —
SSCUss ihe ans and symptoms of parosiic cies
State Greeding mloces tar porncdtes

sian Breventiar rramcriines.,

| Eads such Oo wihiees, bochena, protozoa and fur al Gane chvecias, How ¢
2 brewent cunelves from getting sick?

rasite sn organism that lives in or on another organi. it gains from the

“body where it is sitting. is fed or nourshed by the body where Ih Tbvlrvga, Teves
Body fram which the parasie is feeding, doms not gain trom the parade, Poraslles
ean live ina human body and they are harmtul, Eventually they cause pemasithe
diseases, The body on which the parasite is living bh called ¢ hest,

“Parasitic diseases

A parasitic disease is passed on or transmitied by a parasite, When someone |s
suffering froma parasitic disease. there are signs and symptoms thal show on that
_ person. Examples of parasitic diseases are malaria and biiharia,

_ Malaria as a parasitic disease

— Malaria is caus ed by a Pereete called plasmodium,: fi) brytamen 6 an Ret a

peeve 2 See ghana lsrasicrorss fe sprecds trough
infect spreads malatia, Study Fig Figure



--- Page 20 ---
ae biting @ human being _

‘ © C&GOh S Bitten by an infected mosquito, the parasite enters the & og
Se MSsquito’s saliva. The parasite burrows inta the human skin and Dreeg.
SWOT CACRGS AOU Sein.

=F |

prevent mosquito bites?

Where do mosquitos breed?

MOSQutos breed in unc Ng water. Unmoving water sources ore WoOTer squNtES:
Inoteo rot fidw fo exomcis. po niGs-and lokes. They can ako be known asstagnant
water sources. We can also find sfagnant water at home, when we hove rub! 316 1
Ond emp containes » SOurces of stagnant wah ar !

Wing Ground, When rain falls
increase, leading fo a rise in the oreeding areas for masquitos,
Signs and symptoms of malaria.

I. Feeling weok
2. Foaming to fol asieep ov WOkING UP several times during the night

ry
3. Fewer
4. Grinding teeth in your seep

3. Having pain in muscles or joing
é& High temperciure

.



--- Page 21 ---
'2 Sleeping under a mosquito net

im Taking malaria prevention tablets

[4 Weornng long clothes thot cover your lagsand om ‘
4 Covering pits and clearing mbbsh to prevent the emengance of stagnant!
water where mosquitoes breed.

as. The « oreo between | the two areas in ted coe are not jake arent.
@ ore Zones or areas which ore prone to molana. It means people who five in
ones ore likely to suffer from molona. These ore in the nerihern and easiem

Verona ok J

B arecn offected by mooma
Areor reo! ofected by freind

"igure 1.16 Areas affected by Malaria In Zimbabwe

‘Bilharzia as a parasitic disease

 Bilharzia is a porasitic disease which is caused by parasitic worms called
_ schistosoma, Bilharzia is common in ponds. streams and imgation canals. Smail
animals called snails live in ponds, streams and even irigation canals. Those snails
_ transmit bilharzia, Ifa human being walks barefooted, he or she may get infected

by the parasites that cause bilharzia.
|


--- Page 22 ---
= <<

A snail “
& snail's @ small animal that lives in fresh water. Look at the animal in Fj
Hove you seen it before?

Snails breed in sources of fresh water like ponds, lakes, rivers. reservoirs and canals.
The snail thet caries the schistosomiasis breed in those iresh water sources,

1 on igure |-18.and answer the questions that fotlaw.

|. Describe what the People ore doing.

2. Are these people safe from bilharziq?

3. What con you do to help these people from gélting the bilharzia disease?



--- Page 23 ---
Study Figure 1.19 and answer the follawing questions.
1, Are these people sofe from the bilharzio disease?
2. Whateoan you do la help than? oa

Figure 1.20 A pond

Figure |.20 shows a clear pond. The water is clear but it is not safe for drinking.
People can gel infected and become sick frorn drinking clear water, This: is

) Because we can nol see bacteria or germs with our naked eyes, People should

| feot water before drinking it,

Signs and symptoms of Bilharzia

“Signs ond symptoms of Bilharzia infection include:
J. Abdominal pain

| 2. Anemia (shoriage of blood)

3. Bloocin stool or urine
4. Coughing

4. Diarrhoea

6. Failing to feel full afer having meals

' Pafigue

Feeling weak

. Hoving skin irritation or rashes

0. Having high temperature above 38°C
|, Muscle pain.

fe
7
|
|

How fo prevent bilharzia
I. Avoid swimming or coming into contact with stagnant contaminated water,

| 2 Bol water before use.



--- Page 24 ---
Exercise F

Summary

- Where do porasites breed?

A parasite ian 7 organism that lives inor on another —
A. ploce 8 pone C. stream D, raat
a human being walks barefooted in or neara contaminated river che
gets offected by a porasite ihatcauses_

A molona B. bilharzia its goilre : D. kwashior i!

The following « a sign ‘of say mMeone suffering from biharzia disease__.

A. low temperature B. blood in urine

C. vomiting BD. stomach oche
When o human being it bitten by a mosquito. he or she could get et
A. bilharia -B. malaria €. cholera D. typhoid
Water snails are known to transmit a disease called

A, bilhargia B. malaria C, goltre D. kwa

Explain hwo WOys of Preventing bilharia,

What is the nome of the insect that spreods malaria? ra
Name sources Of water thal ore contaminated where people must not ¢ ae
drinking water.
What happens to People when they eat undercooked faed?

Moalane ond Bilharzia are parasitic diseases.
Parasitic diseases fe caused by organisms such. os The snail
Fes burrow into human skin,
breed and lay eggs in our skin,
C diseases can be Prevented by aveiding comaminated fa



--- Page 25 ---
Accidents sometimes happen, but we must know. their | :

Study Figure 1.2] and discuss how accidents con be couged.”

Unit4 Safety at school and In the community

In this unit you will: |

identify possible dccidents Ihat con sceural home and al school
discuss safety measures to be implemented at home or schodl
identify danger waMming signs at school

administer first aid an wou neds

Le ODpropniote protective clothing.

| Flashback

| Mame the laboratory safety rules.

Possible accidents at home and school

When children are at home or school they need to be safe from danger arising
from accidents. An accident is an event that causes harm, injury ar even death fo
people. Sometimes aecidents are unforeseen.

When we foresee accidents, we should always preventihem, When someone has
been hurt in an accident, he ershe needs immediate, help. through what is called
First Ald. There is need for safety in our schools andsHémés, Safety isa condition

that mokes one feel protected. i -' ios! rp te
<a 'o.e RF

(con prevent them, When accidents happen, they hi hpeople: ‘Of, cneperty.

There are many different ways accidents in which accidents can happen at home
orschool. Study Figure |.21 and discuss which accidents could possibly occur.

There are many accidents that could possibly occur at home and school these
include:

* Cuts

* Sprain

* Fracture



--- Page 26 ---
* Biles
= Poisoning
* Browning.

Figure 1.21 Couses of accidents

| Activity 10”

If greups of four, ae
Discuss how the possible accidents mentioned could happen at sehoal andar
home,

safely measures are actions put in ploce to prevent an a@ecicent or harm te
Aeoole.

Safety measures around the home
Possible accident —_—- Preventive safety measure

Do no! handle sharp ebjects such. as knives, scissey

|_ond razor blades without the help of an adull, aie
Always ask an acuit to assis! you when hanelling Ho
Pols and pans from the stove. Wear kitchen glo

__when handling hot things,

Sil cemforably when eating a

slowly, making sure you chew your

Always slee



--- Page 27 ---
]Orewning | Dont go swimming withoul an adull, When yau see
someone crowning go and calll for help trarn an adult,
De net attempt ta rescue them yourself, |
Do operate electric appliances with wel hands. Da
Nel ploce sharp metal ob ecis In an electric socket.
Avoid climbing to get something from those hard to
reach places like cupboards, refridgerator and so on.
_ Callan adult to come fetch It for you,

Do nat eat plant leaves. Donat foucharuse detergents
|_ of insecticides and pesticides.

Safety measures in school

| Possible accidents Preventive safety measures

Always put litter such as banana peels in the bin,
Always make sure your shoe laces are tied. Bo net run
in-coriders or in the classroom. oy
Follow the safety rules of he laboratory. Donot operate

a bunsen burner without the help of the teacher.
Do not go to the swimming pool in the absence ol! the
teacher,

Follow rules of sporting games. Do not shove or push
each other,

Vsprain and fracture |

“Safety measures in a school

“These ore steps faken fo make sure that school learners and everyone else in
the school is sofe from danger. Accidents must always be prevented. In trying
| to prevent accidents, there is need to have safety drills in school, This is where
all lsamers are trained on how to behave when there is an unwanted fire in the
pechool.

rk A discussion
s round your se! hool in groups and see areas where accidents can happen.
1a! could be the causes of the accidents?

would you do to prevent the accidents from happening?.



--- Page 28 ---
=

Danger warning signs in the school and the community

Figure 1.22 Danger warning signs

Activity 12 |

. What does each sign mean in Figure 1.227 a

. Go pound your school in groups and identify oll the Ganger waming 3
‘oreund. ae
Draw and name each two of them, for example, a hump, rive siowh

\ | children crossing ond $o.0n.

First Aid
When accidents happen. we should give help to the injured person by doing First
Aid, before the person is taken to the clinic or fo the doctor for full treatment. AN

accident can cause a cut, brube or wound.

Administering first aid on wounds
When someone is bleeding. we put direct pressure on the cul with a. clean cloth
until the bleeding stops. The wound can also be cleaned with soap and wam :
water, Then the wound must be protected from infection or dirt getting into it.
The last things fo take the injured person to the clinic or doctor for full medical
attention.
Contents of the First Aid Kit
1, Plosters ino variety of sizes and shapes =v
Small, medium and large serie gauze dressings
At least two sterile eye dressings
Triangular bandages
‘Crépe rolled bandages
Safety pins
Disposable sterile gloves

T

oo



--- Page 29 ---
Agere | 2) First old kit content:

Whats the ute of each of these items which ore found in a First Aid Box?

What is protective clothing?

eve clothes Gre wom to prevent people fram being hurt in the home or ot
work,

Activity 13.
 Sroup
|. Study the Figure 1.24,
2. Nome each one of them,
3. When is it wom?
14. Why is it worn?



--- Page 30 ---
he fay TF
AEN Loveday tin * on wowed
Sacamets em Me he at you

oa 5 Saeresling

> ge Me ; ,
apt <i =~ nave Geen
OOS e WORRY Hh ee



--- Page 31 ---
_ Drerw Cry teary MGS Tear | the A dal 1) Heyl Pils
f atcicients.

Vite Se lal an i hacer from

ilies?

Bechet, is Very Impeartant in the h
un 6 important te Prevent! accidents before thay hop pen
People should praven| occicients al home

P SS (tis MeOesgary lo pul en iolety c hotihirieg,

4 All schools must have safety slqqris
sda On Occicient he

Me one who is hurt

omnes, Shoals ariel ¢ orm«|©unily,

Mik ne sche,

IppPens, the people around must help with Firs! Aid to

__ af

le N es or opel

vathout change
= - nol wel eared

Multiple choice
The following are human teeth except _
A. incisors B. premolars

When teeth decay, it means they get

CC. ~ molars

D. bones

A. long B. rotten C. thinner D. whiter
3. An Gault hasatotalof ss teeth.
fA. 22 B. 32 Cc. 42 52
4. The —— make a fot of ond they ore found in ont of the mouth. |
_ The incisors are used te:
| A. chop food B. grind food C.. mesh food D. swallow
16. Our teeth are quoted by a substance called _ ‘
ia A. milk B. anamel Cc. gums D. incisor
| 7: Molaria and bilharia cre___——_iseases.
A. parasitic B, stomach C. children's men's



--- Page 32 ---
seq) diseases in our ;
—B. closs C. skin
ania Parasite spreads through a mosquito
B. legs. Cc. eyes
ur teeth con couse. — my!
B. teeth to grow
D, join each olher

Structured questions

iin ieee of human teeth.

Of person that treats loath decay.
of tooth decay,

ee ullo causes malaria?

tant te people?
@ between milk feeth and p permanent teeth?

oS

ee ee



--- Page 33 ---
Materials and structures

Fur

wnt S Characteristics of materials
in this unit you will: | - =

fenol refers to any substance in which a thing Is made. Therefore, material
be naturally made or it can be man-made. List man-made and natural
mols You know,

Key words

brittle elasticity flexible fragile hardness — rigiclity
properties softmess

lol is the type of matter from which something i¢ m

ade oul of. lf can be
ural or man-made and has many Properties. |! is wed to moke cifferent items.

ial aiso has ao mass meaning that you con weigh it. HW is recognised by

france mostly but sometimes with the help of our senses. An element is the
uUBbsfance in noture and cannot be broken down further into smaller parts.
lure is he combination of twa or more substances. There are different ways
separating mixtures, These are sieving, filtration, evaporation and distillation,
) Activity 1

i



--- Page 34 ---
| Study Table 2 | below and lecnto describe lhe different prap
thot we fine IN. ourhames and arund us.

Material that It is made of
| Metal

9. Make a list of six materials with different properties,
diferent item, describe what itis made of. nl
S28Me items. describe the material that it s mate ol,
UT EXetcise book. make a table like that one above an

lon: Comparison of materials At
ihe material that ig used (o moke.a knife with that

erence between o dish towel ond a bot



--- Page 35 ---
ofeach type of material in everyday life:
od (c) mbber (qj cloth (e) metal

ils and their use
(doy lite people moke use of goods or ferns. The goocls are wed
Purposes hat suit them. Goods are mode of a substance called
AAG around us is made up of matter and i! can take up Ihe slate
d or 905. For exarnple. a knife is made of metal because it’ has fa
Brent things. We use cotton fo make clothes because catton is soft and
» When we say cotton is flexible it means its mot SH. (his nalrigid. We are
weor clothes because they ore nal reget.

a used fo make windows because it is transparent, When we sal it is
ent it means we con see through it, When we ore in our houses we see
fide through the windows. When driving or moving in ihe car we see
bh the car windows,

like clay pots and dinner plates are brittle. They are hard bul fragile. Ta
fe means they easily break. Clay pots con be used cas woler containers
However, when put under pressure they break.

tick is made of wood because it does not canduct heat. To conduct
(fo be oble ta hold heat.



--- Page 36 ---
J!) Moteriatretesto ,
| A Ony sUbstance of which a thing is made
©. metal ebjects only
| = Wooden objects anly
U. Bo S Objects only
2. Naturaaty Made material is ; ; |
; &. Made by man B. not made by man
; 6, Made by a few men D, made by few men ar
id, Pipi that is described as lragile can be clay or can be ——
a 5B. metal C. glass DB. ruby
th Bi Pe of matter that makes clothes, all
B. elastic C. cotton CD. mm
¥ do w we Use glass for windows in our homes and vehicles? —
seCOuse it js transparent B. because it;
duse it is Cheap BD. because it very
‘One object made from rubber.
J cooking stick mode of wood?
e alifer SON when refering fo properties of material?

Silference between glass material and metal material?
Ww and name two-dilferent materials that are used to m



--- Page 37 ---
it 6 Elements, mixtures and compounds

s unit you will: rf
dain how to separate different mixtures
onstrate separation of mixtures.

are removed from liquid by the process of filtration. Distillation. is a process
ed to purify water.

we learn about elements, mixtures and compounds. Mixtures ore

re?

6o Sop) of different substances put together. We can, therefore saya
a substance that is made by combining cr putting together two. or more
; saferick,

-we have a mixture. it must be a substance that can be separated
what it was before fhe mixture. For example, we can Rove salt and

whi oh is used to treat people suffering from dianheea er a running
in this | cose, salt and sugar solution is a mixture but we can separate the
san get back the sugar and the salt. You are now going to leam

ate mixtures. Some of them



--- Page 38 ---
How to separate different mixtures
In this section, we are going 1
separate grain and chalf mixture the
Grain rafer to a seed of a cereal like
wheal. Grain can be separated, for exa
con hondpick wheat from rapoke. You 1
sieve orfilterthe'grain. in thiscase; the wheal seeds
Therelore. we are able to separate the grains frome

ihe chaff,

ao leam how 1° ¢
through sieving.
rapoke. oF
mole you
ean aka

Another method of separating a mixture ls called
filtration. Filtration is a method that is used where
we want to separate, for example, sand and water.
Woter can be filtered as we remove sand poriicles.
For example, water can pass through filter paper

IFis well Wed where we have a solution.
Serine leg aad
AG fiquid tums inte a gas wera)

j- The other substance that cannot
femain behind. That way we wil



--- Page 39 ---
sto the Dility  Gtiroct Sie Ooyhciee Te VO ST Li
ab ee ee Pa ees: Fe Ce
yoamagnet ang there are others that ore nol. When wa ute rinenaberr,
Mm also S60 orate mdterioks w fs 27 TV ae ae Pee
Ls Lees o Tr he eet ae Tih ry i ow Par is Evie iret |
— ct Those Thc ore rect metal wel rot he iis ae o. home! Pv ot ae
Tes con be cen Woted he ‘ma a ae i Pe i ee

HUIS of four ite ae natencts of ff
! ioe hrougt y evaporation.
<lie, n < ereah by Shaka

WOOCER

Different materials can make up a mixture,
a mixture can be separated.
4 Mixtures can be separated in different ways.

 Sieving. filtration, evaporation ond magnetism can be Lised TO separate
mobdures:

A is a substance that is made by combining or putting logether two ormore
different materials

6. is a subsiance thal is no! mode by combining or putting together Iwo

_ of more ditferent materials

. tsa substance that forms when two or more elements chemically reaet

‘DB. isasubstance that attracts other particles,



--- Page 40 ---
“B. elie saa C. Being.
Of separating a mixture,
Irate poruiiies from water the process called__
___&B, filtration Cc. evaporation
| YOU separate @ groin mixture?
B. sievir Cc. electrolysis
Poarate melee from sand, ihe process or

falar cy. filtration
understand S the word mixture?
prenes between filtration and distilation?



--- Page 41 ---
.
ef

Unit 7 Tools
i In this unit you will: | } 7

} 1. dition toc
Es construc

iof Gir chalce
han artetact fram skelches
O08 to Increase efficiency.

Flashback - ec

oe weed to make work Gcsier, Name kitchen tools and gorden tools you |

here ore many tools Used at home, These Include kitchen tools, garden tools.
pateING Tools and many cther household tools.

Activity 10

In groups of four.
1. List 5 examples of kitchen tools.
2. list 5 examples of Jarden tools.
S. List 5 examples of building tools,

’ aterials used to make different tools

90ls are made from different materials. in Zimbabwe we keep flowers in different
ontainers. Flower Pots are made from different matenals like clay, metal, Plastic
nd 50 on.



--- Page 42 ---
wobble realenars

We would lee fa ce:

How to design tools ook WEA |

1 ea oe ae |
i Ls i toe est if fs Aas Py ¥ ii i ea FY hi Pe
' wii ol design we [pga
When designing o how A ier the Gener: es SOM,
i, pate be] é L 5, he ai , T aed me ii
a | row ye
ii Ry 1
) ees
(Cr) Laprers
[@) hemhwne,
; heal weit ti ceed havi oc like. FOL 6ve Colour
i vw TPT WLI Te _

When sketching a design
in ihe final aeagn



--- Page 43 ---
en the design is available, we thentook for the materials toconstructtne.artelact,

xample, a lower pot. Collact {ha materals and begin the: consimchon, Ke
al product should be close to the sketch clesign as much as possible,

| 5
“Solety should be exercisad whan

eywhen Culling parts wilh a sclesers

orany other sharp objects.

} Activity 11 Project Work

| Inelividual Work
1. Sketch adesign of a flower pot.
2 Collect materials to make your flower pot.
Mould or make your flower pot

Modifying tools to increase efficiency

| There ore a lot of ways we'can use fo modify tools to increase efficiency. For
example, in dimbabwe some people keep drinking Visors seteocet es
some in clay pots.

Figure 2.8 Water containers

in order to make the centainers/tools more efficient. people haye added plastic
_ taps to water containers. some have even added electric elements to plastic
containers so that they can easily heat their water. To Clay pots, some have
| included handles for easy handling.

©
\
| 5


--- Page 44 ---
| Toots ond fhe modifield version
25 litres waler buckel ;

0

25 lire water bucket wiih:

2Silitre water bucket with electric element

Clay pot wih aid and handles



--- Page 45 ---
The Retowing és SO Kichen tac
A. 2 hoe

A. a cooking stick.c

a shevell D. aspade
Ming & oO forden ton),
[Aa hoe &. COOKING stick C. ashovel BD. aspode
a The folowing | eo Dying foal,
| & ahoe B. a cooking stick C. a trowel D. adisn
A cocking stick is made of =e
A. wood B. metal — Cc. China D. glass
Ss. A trowel 6 mace of = Se
A. glass B. wood c. metal D. paper
What it © design?

; | Give hwo tools you

San Modify and shale how you con modify them?
Drow any One TOOhand lots it,

| y rock Ofe Used by peo
iA _ Took S-are found in cit

ble when they want to da some work,

ferent groups which are garden, kitchen and building
Toots s con De designed.

a PAcd Gesign is a plan of something,
Teols con be modified fo improve efficiency,



--- Page 46 ---
Unit8 Structures

. identity natural structures in the environmen!
Construct models of structures

relate structures and their functions
appreciate the aesthetic value of Upgen

Different structures are found in rural areas and urban areas. Give 3
)Sommon sityetures found in rural areas.

> be é cele birds nest anal: cave ae These stn
Joture. The relationship between structures and
ey ree Natural structures are also importar
QuATU |



--- Page 47 ---
MN Hatureyly Three co orcs Soled weoltiening, Conwnen eowes |

. Bamboshoave cay

1 Di ere

aie Chinhoyi caves

ASN may Gir

large rise of the earth's suriace ic
Wil and same of therm have
ount Myangani,

called an VCH vloin A mriecivbe i {a bie il WH hye Wi
VEry steep sides, The highest mountain in tirnbabwe



--- Page 48 ---
"ll.
va — nch on the | aol Mount Nyangor
3 Present you AnGincS fo fhe class.

rp ER ahs | jase S9UCture which is formed 6
rocks are found in Many paris of Zimbabwe:

¥ nd oe rocks
ona! eens necr Epworth fo i

ond are |
& Plc) et |



--- Page 49 ---
Ng in lowlands benefit from mountains. They are the sources of
fivers on Earth. Mountains also play an important role in the
© they capture moisture from the atmosphere and release
water, which is essential for industries, settlements and
ownstream, Water from mountains § also used to generate
Renewable energy from mountains promotes economic
ally in rural areas.

4 from mountains is the main source of energy. They provide
1) use-and export, They are also provide wild foods, such
gome. Mountains also provide ground for recreation,
M octivities. People do mountain climbing, for example. in

formations‘are seen throughout Zimbabwe. The natural shelters
ICK formations in the Matopos Hills, which are part of the Matopos
Central Zimbabwe, have been in existance since long ago. These
led to the development of rock art Zimbabwe. The balancing rack
on the Zimbabwean dollar, The most commonly known balancing
16 0f the Motabo Hills. which is the inselberg of "Mother and Child
) it has become o tourist attraction.

a

)@ structure with balancing rocks.
two natural structures.

ef n of mountains?

nal lives in a cave?

Mctures ore a tounst centre. True or false

weon dollar has a picture of caves, True or false

Por created.
1 and have different functions such as providing shelter for

mmanly known structures are Chinhoyicaves, Mount Nyangani

©


--- Page 50 ---
fe substances to MOK
join two or more subslo Hotel
such os @ chemicol abe ie
a smal seed of fruit of Cered! IVP
fe — a feces af moving apan
mesh or closely perforated metal oF

End of topic assessment

Multiple choice
C. phostic

A GROSS is
A. soft B. elastic C. fragile
following are made af woodexcept
Oo desk B. a chair C. aruler
j4. We co Ts€porote soil and water byamethed called
AL filtratios B. evaporation Cc. sieving
* ____isonélement of Gesign.
sketch EB. colour C. design
e NOGY'S too! to increase its :
B. design C.. length
‘ES Oe found in i
DIC. B.30uthAinca 3 c. Mozambique
SPOCK Gre called gq ,
B. fiver C. kopie

mousIgiN = Chive

Used 5 homes long ago.

25 9 storage place.
TZimbabwe,



--- Page 51 ---
Ventures Primary

science and Technology

Learner's Book Grade

A 7 college press


--- Page 52 ---


--- Page 53 ---
1. identify forms of energy
2. Gescnbe forms of energy
3. demonstrate kinetic and potentiq| eneray in action

Energy is the ability lo do work, There are many forms of energy. These ore heat
sound, ght, to name o few familiar sources. There is also potential and tinetic
energy. Potential energy is energy stored in an objec! in the same position. Kinetic
energy is fhe eneray found ina moving object. A fuel is. a moteral that if bumt It
produces heal An exomple of 4 fuel is coal, wood, oll la name a few. inorder for
buming fo fake place there mus! be o fuel, air fo supply oxyaen and heat. One
should take precaution when burning fuels as they are hozardous



--- Page 54 ---
in our bedies enables us 'O walk, torun, fo pi

different forms of eneray.



--- Page 55 ---
Figure 3:4 Sound energy

JA bulb can produce light energy if elec tricity is switched on.
A lomp can produce light energy.

Figure 3.5 lightenergy
‘An apple hanging on o tree and is about to fall has got potential energy.



--- Page 56 ---
show how it can produce light energy.
at show how ican produce sound energy.
ums so Os fo produce sound eneray.

Ir of Bilis teacher, light a condia with a match stick $a | 08 fo

is the 2 ebilty fo do wark.
. lightning B. wetter C. energy BD, thunder
| 2 Oe type of energy does a moving ball have?
AG light B. kinetic C. sound D, chemical
a ey mull that has been fil after switching on electricity has got

C, potential B. light



--- Page 57 ---
fe Far a tree ‘branch. |

|
| [edk at the diagram above ond answer the questions below,
ta) What type of energy is contained in the fruit that is about ta fall?
(bl he fruit is falling to the ground, twill be containing energy.
te) What do we call energy contained bya radio playing music?
fd} Nome the energy contained by an electric bulb that enables us to see

@ moving object,’ Potential energy is any form af
at ging ona pile 2 can eee ‘ey one Ala



--- Page 58 ---


--- Page 59 ---
: sound energy
BD. light eneray
Oves forward Reese itnew contains
B. sound energy
D. kinetic energy

B. potential eneray

D. sound energy

wards to the ground has got _ _energy.
B. chemical energy

DB. kinetic energy

a sane € bata 4



--- Page 60 ---
y to do work. |
‘forms of energy such as kinetic, potential, sound, hr

y can be changed from one form to qnother,
nergy possessed by a body because of its position,
an be changed to kinetic energy,



--- Page 61 ---
ygen is. a very important gas that we find in the air around us. All animals and
plants need oxygen for them fo respire and produce eneray that keeps us alive.
Without oxygen, all animals. and plants will die. We want to find out if oxygen 15
necessary for fuel to bum.



--- Page 62 ---
“The-candie That sno! Covered confinues to burn, This means that this ea ndieis still
=4 sverything that itneeds in order to continue buming. The covered condia
only burs for a few seconds then it stops buming. This means thal something
“heeded to continue burning is no longer there. It wos used Up when the candig |)

dies again. Place them in a dish with some water, Again, cover |
uming ¢andies with a transparent glass. The other burning candie |

Figure 3.7(b) Absence of oxygen

happen os soon as the covered candle stops buming.
en fo about one fifth of this.glass.

the ‘oxygen that was used by the burming cance
‘the oxygen hos been used up, the candle can ne
‘Water then rises to fill up the space that had been oc
8 Used during the buming process. Notice tha

il Continue to burn, This is because the oxygen fl



--- Page 63 ---
‘all able to bum and produce heat, Once Ine
lable, the el will stop burning.

a form of energy that warms things. We get heat from many sources fer
=, the sun, We would like to find out if heat is necessary for fuels fo burn.

classroom, put together some dry wood.
6aps; on one heap of the firewood light a matchstick.

figure 3.10(q) Presence of heal Figure 2.10(b) Absence of heal

ies i After a few minutes, what can you see?

4, Whieh of the two heaps is burning?

ls. Whot hes happened to the heap that was not ignited?
Reneat this experiment and see if you will get the same results.

For fuels ta burn heat should be present. If you want lo stan a fire, wiih wood In
order to cook samething, you have to ignite or start the fire by lighting a matchstick
in order to increase the heat. Without increasing the heal, the wood will not burn,

Exercise C

1. The following are examples of fuels except
A, wood B. candle C. woter

DB, paraffin
2. Oxygen can be found in

A, the air oround us B. carbon monoxide
C. ait from industries D. nitrogen



--- Page 64 ---
ib / jee aon tumbler or beaker stops Buming beats |
sn in the glass is now used up )
en disturbed by the water
ean disturbed by the glass

the water in the dish is too cold for the candle fo continue burning
The water rises in the giass where the candle stopped buming in order tg]
replace ;
a fhe water ihat wos used by the burning candle

the heat thal was used by the burning candle

: the candle wax
2. the oxygen thal was | used up when the candle was burning
ja) Gnd Cs needled for fuels to urn.
|  {b) State three materials that are fuels.
‘| 7. Say whether the following statements are true/false,
(a) Oxygen is needed for fuels fo burn.
(6) Oxygen can be found in the ar.
(ce) A covered candle wil continue burning,

Fuel hazards

Fuels can b be solid, iquid and gas, Fuels are substances that can bum to produce

a eee aoa Pionero Bees can Soy cause fires that can burn down and



--- Page 65 ---
vel. If Setrol or rcliesel
r is very hot, this.can
start a dangerous fire outbreak. |t
‘ean-e cabo be caused by leaking of
petrol containers.

Fuels such Of gas Used in gas
sfoves can alo be dangerous if
net hangled with care, |f the gas
is alowed to leak, this can cause
@ fre thot con even injure or kill
people and also destroy buildings
and property,

Leaving buming cigarette stubs and
litter like glass bottles in the Bush
can lecd too veld fire.

Safety precautions
when using fuels

), Fuels should be kep! in cool
places where temperatures ore
keot low.

7 Fuels should be kept oul of
ehidren's reach. Children
should not be allowed to
fermper wilh qos stoves and fuel
containers.

3. Fire extinguishers should be

found in homes, schools, cars
and in industries soasto help pul
oul fires. However, hey should
be checked on the expiry date
because offer a cerfain period
they will nal werk.

4, Read and follow instructions

when operating electrical
opphances.

Figure 3.12 Leoking petrol containers causes hazards

Figure 3.14 Veld fire coused by cigarettes



--- Page 66 ---
8. "pausal 9
0. cause eal to fall

ae 8. iron clothes
ere | Oo. cook food

* ait eherid he present for a fire to start burning,
gure You | ovoid fire outbreak fr

i iad 0 thin I a5 Uaiilican 6 jo -moke

q ris the use ofa fire: exling uisher?

ore ie |
or sshould: be taken when storing and buming fuels.
late should be checked: on the fire extinguisher.

_ = i
: = c
i ]
=a =a
—
=|
Fi
Loon
-*. he
a”
7 —-
ee a
i_ i I i}
ae ;
i = aot
= ' Fy
=
— i
_
ea)

bl
sie



--- Page 67 ---
custo see is ied
D. solar

B. Steam
D. Pelle

ons needed for fuels to burn are.
er &. oxygen and heat

1 ie) exyaen and corbon dioxide

@ stored in a very hot place because

[i ond cause fire oulbreaks

B. put out fires
DB, reduce road accidents

8. Neal {o4 Sig


--- Page 68 ---


--- Page 69 ---
Teneo aes
: C, dentist
35 in the human
Cc. eyes

C, everyday _ milk

Cc. seven D. eight
colled plasmodium. :
c. Rill ), anobject

3. canines —sC. periolers D, molars
nal that canes a parasite which causes bilharma is called _
oo B. housefly ©. snail >. ant
AmOn in the following places except. ;
B. steams Cc. fiver D. swimmi 3 pool
Squite spreads malana?
male mosquito B. infected mole mosquito
black ae BD. infecled male mosauito
t porasitic diseases when they drink
B. wan water
D. contaminated water
and vegerables can cause parasites to enter the human |

B. meat Cc. fruits | BD. rile
B. having skin initations:



--- Page 70 ---
i is fully cooked
we ‘itis aye coKed
are next fo the

D. milk teeth

¢, cavity D. gum

| eer has
ipsa ingame may mean that someone
full ofter hav nan als 8. parasitic disease

Bb. chelera
imal that transmits bilharia parasites and it lives in
" B, ashelter ¢. water D. a building. |

h to grow in @ human being after the age of 20 ore colled _

ei)

3 REG nS Rerecets D_ wisdom jes} fl

1
8. Sialeniicl energy |
D. “sound energy

B. sound eneray |

D. kinetic energy

‘e . 6 very cheap

| wo hs very light to cam
8 found inthe lr that helps fuels to burn is edied ;
¥ -B. water: vapour

DB. carbon dioxide 7

fon Ne ag ofa See

eae Seton

o 9



--- Page 71 ---
form of Pesce: clothing? |
Cc. helmet BD. overalls
ands mode.
B. fragile and brittle
BD. Aotural ond man

garden tool.

BR. cooking stick C. hoe D. spoon
(hat is usually built in the ___
: B. forest Cc. city centre BD. rural areas
is NOT a form energy?

B. pressure C. heat D. potential

_&. oe BD, heat

“B, ca ise or Kioniele
D, oxygen and heal


--- Page 72 ---
Draw’ ond label the incisor tooth GHewing the root, footh and enamel.
gn or symptom of someone suffering from a parasitic disease

peal one place where bilharzio is common.

Nome one way of preventing porasitic diseases.
Nome hyo sources of water which are contaminated.
Write two. woys Through which parasites enter the human body.
, 7. State one sign of tooth decay,

6. Explain the difference between the incisors and the molars teeth.

)?. Home one sign of someone suffering from kwashiorkor
IQS Explain the causes of goitre.

113. Whotis o bolonced diel?

. Explain the meaning of each of the following words:
[5) Wisdom teeth (c¢] Enamel
ibe places where people ore likely to get bilharzia.

plain the following terms: ;
(b} Malaria (c]_ Tooth decay,

a) | Parasite

[Total 25)



--- Page 73 ---
icity and electronics

i] > | — sources of electricity in Zimbabwe
}2. identify dangers of electricity

}4, suggest safety precautions when using eiecticity
4 identity conductor ond insulators.

Key words

‘conductors generator insulators — transmit



--- Page 74 ---
: that = eis electicity. Agene
anical energy into electical energy,

oobwe where power statons which

Olwakae

Caney

A Bulan Meiteingn



--- Page 75 ---
sid sohece, ‘colleges Uriverties and homes
ma saniogle we con see wall sockets where we can

‘Aigure:4.3 Transmitting electricity Figure 4.4 Using electricity at home.

ticity from a battery
Botleres contain chemicals that can produce electicily, Botteres can convert

chemical eneray into eleciicity. A battery has gota negative and.and q positive
and,

Bs ore Usually used in small radios.
(han placing batleries inva radio cr a
ihe batteries must be placed in
adget such that the positive end of
2 battery is connected to the negative
. The: negative end of the battery
2d to the positive terminal, Look



--- Page 76 ---
fing is. connected fo the flat end of the battery and the end witha knob |
ted to Ihe flatend where there is no spring. on

s into the gadget and switch on the gadget. See if it works, —
you i Sect in the matters | ina seas way. t the soles wil rece

Solar energy i energy
obtained from the sun.
Solar panels can change
solar energy to electricity.
The electicity fram the salar
panel is stored in a battery.
The panel § cennected
to an Inverter, The inverter
‘changes solar energy te
electic energy which 1s
then stored in a battery.

pe bec thiery

Figure 4.8 Using solar as o source of powet



--- Page 77 ---
3 eouren water ce: ignfening

i Hwange is called :
er B. hydropower C. diesel power D. wind power
er Station fo the sub-statian, electricity is comied through |

B. wind Cc. powerlines D. clouds
—an ieee en thal can be ced lo power electronic devices:

B. Botllenes
is D. Hyoino
found i in power stations where they qenerate electricity.
rs is ‘asada . Engines ‘a Fower stations



--- Page 78 ---
the socket is offalw

Figure 4,9(a) Noked wires

Wet hands

When using electrical appliances
such os stoves, fridges and so on.
make sure that your hands are
ary. Whenever you touch electric
godgets with wet hands you could
getoon electic shock that could
seriously injure or even kill you,

Fixing appliances

When fixing electic appliances you
should make sure thal there ore
ewitched off. Figure 4.lla shows a
boy getting an electnc shock. Tring
to fix an appliance when it bon may
lead fo inuries or death.

Plugging In sockets
itis very dangerous for someone

to plug in appliances while the
sockets are on, You getanelectic
shock. You: should make sure that
Iways before you

plug in-any ‘appliance.



--- Page 79 ---
ine camying electrici
electrocuted.

Figure 4.12 Children playing near power lines and
@lechic sub-stotlons,

fs We plug foa many
Ges onia one wall socket,
isily CQUSe-c fire fo bregk

‘ae Figure 4.13 Overloaded socket

lety precautions
be aware thal electricity con be very dangerous. Exercise extra care and
whenever you are Using electricity to avoid being electracutad. A person
feceived an electric shock is said to have been electrocuted. You can
Winjured or even die if you get electrocuted.
hing on electricity

Wh can be used for turning on and turning off the electricity,



--- Page 80 ---
8 before using any
apliances, Electrical

shouid not be
1 necro woter source,
“2 iho is usually kept

2. Children should not be permitted
fo ploy near power lines or

 @lectric sub-stations.

3. Putup danger waming signs anc

: educate people particulary

| children about the dangers of Perl. nt |
| electricity. Figure 4.15 Using electric appliances with dry handy

4 Never touch of go neor a power
line on the ground,

§ Avoid overoading electric
circuits with too many eleciric

! appliances.

| 6 Neverinset wires or sharp objects

7, Moke: cure: that wall sockets are

ii swite hed off if appliances are
| not being used.

& Always unplug appliances

before cecrma them. So plug



--- Page 81 ---
A above shows that electricity is.
B. good C,. very dangerous D, useless
2 godaets such as stoves, make sure that
} B. Your hands are wet
D. ‘your hands are dry
ever get into contact with on electric cable with naked

cs



--- Page 82 ---
ee

tyourhands ore when you are using Pecheg:

F 332 solor panels to the sun shine, they produce.
‘Say Mba tries fhe following statements are tue of false,
(a) Blectricity is dangerous.
(6) When using electnc gadgets moke sure that your hands are wet,
{c) Never touch or get in contact with o naked wire on an électric eqbis,
fe) Playing soccer near power lines or electric sub-stations should
encouraged.

(e) If you see on electric power line on the ground you should kick it.

entity Bbeuaices Phat are Sood at onde ring alecticity, can you: name tf em,
Name some substances that are insulators.



--- Page 83 ---
iron and stee' are cone \kees of Telectichy. hciterieils

uch as wood, gloss, plastic and rubber do not |
re theretore called insulators,

B. an insulator

ri felectricity § D. a pathway of electricity
| that cannot allow electricity to pass through is called _ :
luictor B. (an insulater ;

we D. a bulb
@ following moterials is a conductor of electricity?
B. rubber C. plastic

moteriols is an insulator?


--- Page 84 ---
ed in pnripabive at the eralewng places, Kanba, Hwa



--- Page 85 ---
D. Mukuyisi tive
sconconvert solorenergy fromthe sunto energy.

: B. electricity Cc. wine DB. rain

@ following is a very dangerous form of behaviour when you are
an ‘anaes move.

‘B. cooking with shoes on
D, cooking while eating

ams above shows the

af lightening B. dongerof crossing o busy rend
rol electricity D. danger of over eating
Yyousee power line lying an the ground, you should
B. held it C. burmit D. never touch it

@ material that can allow electricity to pass Through it. Therefore,

nductor o Sees B. aliquid
Ra ieet icity: ea an ikea

=a ‘on ins nsulator

lecincity BD. a gas |
sonduct elec incily. |

-abie to move from the___ through the |
up un up. : :



--- Page 86 ---


--- Page 87 ---
3 Elements of design
. lin this unit you will:
oF 1. show oppreciation of elements of design in food preparation
@ design an indigenous dish frorn local food sources
13, detcnbe how to prepare on indigenous dish.

Flashback

mecsuremen! recipe

60d is important to our lives. We need ta prepare food that looks appetising.

Food needs to be prepored using comect measurements and served in right

Pr onions. Appetising food will include food with different colours and cooked

| fo have 0.900 fexture. tis important to design our food so that it can look nice
when eating.



--- Page 88 ---
2 food more attractive.

aS

food attractive tram the Figure 5.2?
do we get fram the food shown?

: qs that are decorating the food?
ped in the body.

ery, about the brand. it attracts the eye. |t appetises. Every colour



--- Page 89 ---
iit Wied in bake a cake

he refers to how things feel. Texture can be described as ‘rough’ or ‘smooth’,
# Soft’, Food needs fo be of the right texture and this makes it aopealing
‘ jor ihe consumer. For example, when preparing potatoes, it should

sofmess but nat too hard or too soft.


--- Page 90 ---
flood quality being___—

he relative size and scale of various elements in o design.
iis of a whole and their relationship. How the parts are '

. The proportion of ingredients play an important par

= of one will also affect! the quality of foo.

amine the quality of bread {ob
use little yeast the bread will no



--- Page 91 ---
to small sis,
arbonate of soda and salt to a bail.



--- Page 92 ---
when preparing pumpkin leaves in pe

samy peanut butter are needed?

sae Boo; meal with the remaining 1 cup of water,
meal mixture to the bolling water, stiting constantly with a
im, Cook for about 5 minutes.
hg | cup of zviyo meal, when the mixture Is very thick
voy from the sides of the pot, transfer to a serving | bowl or

n to. shape the mixture into o round shape.

is Gael 1s prepare oO named dish,
iNgredient needed to prepare food is ca



--- Page 93 ---


--- Page 94 ---
d by one oe TOW,
eI Ok

e ee Sas D. money. “7
colour in food design? |
B. to look attractive i

D. to-grow well |

B. tastyand proportional
DB. measurable i

ol 8. bolance and erganisation |
chive: BD: quantifying of ingredients
described os how rough or some#hing is,

| B. colour Cc. big DB. small Ad
fin Be ction: of food involves the ef each ingredient)
spare the food
me 8 shope C. texture D. measurement |

|

|

&. recipe , BD. bowl il

in food preparation deals with organisation: }
50 that tne food tastes and is healthy? it

C, colour D. texture



--- Page 95 ---
—

his unit you will: |

he three states of water
fie the changes water undergoes when heated and cooled,

freezing evaporation condensation



--- Page 96 ---
‘ce cubes burner small lid

ers the burner

eecribe the changes which you observe in the:
condensing; freezing and evaporation.

Observation

renin Heal ee 2eand3.



--- Page 97 ---
ur it changes state to_
statements is true or false.
‘ater it does not change state.
ris pected it cha oe info laa water...



--- Page 98 ---
iL ied orun :
hares! water fram

, pUTPOsES- We get water from different sources,”

sf fhe earth. We alo ha’ ve water from:
ground water, Some sources of wat “ore
ow that we can have protect
When wa! teri iS s coming rons



--- Page 99 ---


--- Page 100 ---
Figure 6.4 4 top

Activity 5
rm fdo you think water from. a tap is safe for drinking?
model-of o tap. of water and display it in YOUr Clossoanm,

© short sentences aboul water from the [op 25.0 poten

A spring of water

“Stucly. Figure 6.5 of water tiowihg
from a spring, The water comes
from underground where it flows
through cracks in the racks below
Ihe earth's surface. Water coming
(OU! from @ spring is sate to drink,

‘Bulonce it flows down in a stream,
‘itmay get contaminated,



--- Page 101 ---
¢) asheam


--- Page 102 ---
Olected and unprotected sources af wets
f tank, spring. reservair, stream, loka, :

fharvesting water from rain in Zimbabwe
Hwateris the collection of run-off water far Productive purpnges., When.
auOlly ruins down surfaces. As it runs-off. it con cause soil erosion, The
be stopped by harvesting it. Water narvesting is alsore regarded
conservation. The harvested water can be usedin many wes,

many ways in which weter can be harvested. |t con be harvested
Gin seasen. The water can be collected from surfaces-on which rain

imes it ls collected from roofs of Buildings and stored in tanks, When
16d, itis Stored for use loter on. The cha: Vaing weather of today’

: ink of woter harvesting and then using It for inigation,

houses’ in the Figure 6.7, Where do
i m the modern house?
‘Ol wares On The modern house?

et



--- Page 103 ---
from the aii ar from the ground floor.

we need to prevent accidents happening when it's

7 oin woter when It is raining.
il yn of water before it rains.

nding metals when itis raining, so thal you can avoid being struck by

So video: of a water harvesting project for learmers 10 see. from,
a smart phone: |
I woter harvesting model, where you use the harvested water]
Jr garden-as homework ana display itin your class. Below'is c list
that you can use for your project in your experiment.

beaker, ¢ a@ small plastic bottle, a small piece oF hosepipes,
r shale fray, hard transparent plastic, a big


--- Page 104 ---


--- Page 105 ---


--- Page 106 ---
if panne ity ice may couse ekriess65. Theis ore wetter
a5 ¥ nich ore caused by dirty water. These are cholera, typhoid and



--- Page 107 ---
iis: means thatit may cause ilinesses to people.

Be cOused by parasitic worms called Schistosoma. It

WOTE! SUCH GS streams, ponds, lakes, rivers, dams,
lor aun ny 2e! infected when you come into.contact with
fet for example. when awimming. washing or drinking water.
enters your body, the worms move in the blood and lay eqas.
PESon Passes out faeces or Wine, 699s are passed out and
Gy and Cause sickness, The 20g that are passed out by an
Ney get into contact with woter, they enter the water snail
All they infect another person.

bacteria that causes cholera.

lf i& usually found in food cr
‘Dy faeces from ap

eon with the infection, The common
ore confaminated water sources. confaminaiad foods mostly
h, crabs, oysters and seafoaci Caught in water polluted with
N a person consumes the contaminated tood or water, the
i faxin in the stomach that produces severe diarhoea. Cholera

ody through the mouth. often in food or water that has been
Auman waste. due to Poor sanitation and hygiene.

=

contracted by eating and drinking contaminated food and
ne siool Can Cause contamination of unprotected
salmonella typhimurium causes one to be ill. The
livesin th : intestines and bloodstreams. The bacteria
ict with feces of an infected person



--- Page 108 ---
4+washes away soil, If can forma 4
| 8. well Cc, river D. dam
te finds its way through cracks Inthe rocks itformsa
— B. spring Cc. dom D. well
js NOT o mon-made woter source.
B. well c. tank DB. tap.
e use to diga forehole?
Toe A oF pick Cc. aspode D. a driller
ne of the following is NOT an open water body?
B. aborehole Cc. aspring D. dar
living in a rural area, where would you get safe water for drinking?
é living In town, where do we get safe water for drinking?
he difference between surface water and underground woler?

doy think borehole water is safe for drinking?
otected source e ol water and label if.

| jpenvironment and we have to look ofter it well.
tected water sources and unprotected Wotler S0LUrCes.
use water not to be safe for drinking. |
ier our Wooler sources SYERYOCY i our lives.



--- Page 109 ---
fain water from roofs of houses
to collect water while it is raining because you may be struck |

lightning Cc. wetness D. weather
int that you would use to collect water from a roof into a

8. gutter C. hosepipe D. atap
We Serve our

a5 8, schools c. environment D, garden
is collected from the ground is called
er 8 damwater C. groundwater D. roof water
= stored in a 2
B. tank ©. spring D. roof
. wall Cc. window D. floor
19 ore states ofwoterexcept
B. evaporation C. liquid DB. solid
the following is an unprotected source of water.
rom B. borehole C. nver D. covered well
le pecs >worns that cause bilharia calied?
B. larva Co. vibrio D. plasmodium

Structured questions

Ways harvesting water with simple technology.
would stare harvested water fram your home roof?
tito harvest walter?

ted water sources. |
ases ore transmitted by water? |
na tap sole for drinking? |
‘con be eaten 18 es water safe,



--- Page 110 ---
ie. =e 1
yw C. heat energy D. kin

ed by the glass tumbler or beaker stops burning becouse]

1@ glass is now used UP

bed by the water

bed by the glass

dish i500" cold for the candle to continue buming

. falk about naked wires |
fouch noked wires

is able “ move from the____ _____ through the)

ce the bulb.light up.

Cc. -coal diesel

( to pass I through it, therefore wood — |
~ £8. oninsulator .
goed conductor of energy:



--- Page 111 ---
nds fis wary: Steevie eles in the rocks it forms a

D. o borehole

2 contaminated water
fe water that breeds parasites

e people typhoid,
‘void getting sick by

: er they drink B. drinking dirty water

asteinwotersources D. going to the hespital,

mal ‘power sgeneratedat

B. Munyot power stealion

: 5 D. Kariba power station

be converted into electricity using

B. compact disks

a D, aluminiurn foil

3 $.on, Hl means

oa

| ru thie itch
through the wire


--- Page 112 ---
eribo k.generated from.

e 6B. moving water C. lightning D. movi t |
vn must be present. s wing il}
de and oxygen B. waterand oxygen
‘and oxygen BD. carbon dioxide and Witer
ofelecincityiasubstance that si. |
icity to pass through it |
a Pi oroas through it
e heat |
tracted by a magnet.
5a good eonductor of electricity : 4
‘ cai C. copper D. paper
a electricity fo pass thraugh it
ty to poss through it
g substances con be oftracted by o magnet _
paper = ©. wood D. plastic |
: ! an insulator (poorconductorat electricity]? )
C. iron D. wood |
D. 30
DB. gums: |



--- Page 113 ---
c. seporale D. break

‘si filtration Dp. sieving

C. rocks Dp, metal
WCE | _ererngy: ,
heat Cc. potential B. sound
electricity shown below

ked wires B. cooking with wel hands
lance while ison D. noked wires
aconducter of electricity.
'B. wood C. oloss 0. rubber
ign in food preparation exce pt _ i
fexture Cc. recipe D. colour
water except
E reine C. liquid D. solid
foll received
of water



--- Page 114 ---
ss B. Ared robot sign. |
psign OB. Weather howard sign ee
|

is pnolinahy protected water source. Hh
Cc. River B. Spring |

: me Boones c. bactena D, water i
preparation means ___.
B. how itfeels  C. how it tastes. D. its quantity

Paper 2

Bodies with cae

hac have we produced?
x because of eating is called


--- Page 115 ---


--- Page 116 ---
and climate

fedict weather changes

12 examine weather forecast slamen!s

|3, inlerpret weather recordings on gonh
time.

- Sdiculdte average rainfall and temperature

Justify the importance of keeping weather records

\,

te illustrate variations from time fo)

Weatt =r chai nges because of different alements such os temperature, sunshing, |
wand, rainfall and cloud cover. i

What Is weather?
Weather is the state of the atmosphere of o particular ¢
ries fromiplace to aio nesphere of a particular place at a given time. it ase

3 Bieter ners simportant for people to be able to predict
1d SO On. Different emobon, 6 Ste such as floods, heat waves:

He lesdin kee ee (Oe Used to predict w athe.
ir Seeele know the general climate of an ee precict weal

2



--- Page 117 ---
licting weather. This involves telling what the weather wil
given place and time.

cast or prediction can be done through indigenous ways or through
adern lechnology,

+ weather changes using indigenous ways
methods of predicting weather came from people's knowledge of
INcings and environment. People would study and note the behaviour

nd plants in certain weather conditions and information wos passed
othe next generation,

Frain
rany jerry manglums (dzvatsvatsva)

black and white stock (shohori/shuramvura)
cuckoo bird (kohwera/rain bird)

|



--- Page 118 ---
eer in which people < can BREA? or foresee weather using
ay ene ¢ can diye wealher fenors from Ietevisiany or Ra



--- Page 119 ---
ftect the environment
al con affect the environment in a good of bad way.
ibout different seasons. Sometimes the climate can bring Warmer
thatmake Us able to grow crops ond feedlivestock, Very hofweather
heat waves and drought which can kill people OF livestock. When

xa much rainfall, floods can occur and cause mony water bome

nediseasesare those thatare caused by drinking contaminated
doand dysentery.

quge or therrnometer and label it in your exercise book. |
ppen to the environment when the weather is foo hot. |

‘wea 1ef conditions prevailing in an area in general or over a long
od of 30 to 40 years =|
eople feel abovt the weatner
of orcold the day is
conditions ina place
}ore water bore diseases except
B. cholera C. dysentery



--- Page 120 ---
tall of the = ke exewet an
ps Cc. ashootingstar OD. heat Wi ave 7

ist Scorded. The Feeaded Peathers ean Be stu died cael
Perec St wl baaveal rapa weathers in sie tute.

an be studied and interpreted. Before the weather is interpreted,
ed and recorded. Temperature is measured in Degrees Celsius
allec CUE ak Rainfall is measured in millimeters by

Ihe following is an. example of a graph
Jiare. Rainfall j is Measured in mm from



--- Page 121 ---
€ showing rainfall received in Mutare.,
PGMOuUnt of rainfall received in Mutare fram Monday fa.

2 fainfall received in Mutare
: in a amount ef rainfall b
in Mutar are,

for the whole Week,
elween the highest and

Qfaph paper ora mathematics exercise book, a pencil, a rubber

recorded at Morange. Primary School in Mutare from Monday 20th

OF to Friday 24th of Jonwary 2017 was as follawe: Monday 19 °C,
Wednesday 25 °C Thursday 21°C Friday 18°C

t graph showing temperature from Monday fo Friday using

he schect had the highest temperature in the week.
Jwest! Temperature and what was thereading? .
ge temperature for the weekdays Monday fo Frid


--- Page 122 ---
ver scenes secures help asta orden
an ae en bails eros to oe eas or Ww

GO out on the Set a mecsune oer

ph oan eel the Walter racer S tor

] meecs ell bs ei ei fora: rionth

C, degrees celsius D, metres

er conditions of a given place
( fa Sse



--- Page 123 ---
armometer and label it. |
graph showing rainfall recorcied over five days at a place!
ngo, The recordings are as follows: Monday 15mm, Tuesday
day 3lmm, Thursday 19mm and Friday 22mm.
late the overage rainfall received in Masvingo as stated above. |
ate the average rain for two days in Masvings: Tuesday 21°C ane

s state of the atmosphere of a particular place at given time
place to place. js
oweather condition that prevails In an crea in general for a long
cted by using different weather instruments.

be recorded for future use and helps to understand the climate,



--- Page 124 ---
: four s@0sons in Zimbabwe
four seasons.

=, Sometimes itis very cold and we wearjerseys. Sometimes |
protec! ourselves from the sun by using an eeeealey

season spring summer winter

onge throughout the year. The changes in weather lead
called seasons. Zimbabwe has four main seasons which
winter and spring. Zimbabwe is our country. but you should
is part of the earth. the earth as a planet. moves around
d the sun, it changes its position. in daing so, the four
g more about each season helps us to predict or

ther wherever we ore in Zimbabwe,



--- Page 125 ---
ortest nights.

: ‘of the Autumn season (mid-March to mid-May)
‘of transition which means a changing season from surmmer tO

ily where trees shed off their leaves from deciduous trees

tart to.go up during this season.

cs of the Winter season (mid-May to mid-August)
m mid-May to mid-AuguSs!

t bays ‘and long nights.

ics of the Spring season (mid-August to mid-November)
mid-August to mid-November


--- Page 126 ---
© full yeor
c “weather D. climate
_C. summer DB, spring
ro summer D. spring

he fon st aye and the shoriest nights?
=. : C. summer D. spring

¢ Esslweaivs spring and OuUIUMN seasons?
1ewing how the s2050ns in Zimbabwe came about.

MN and spring.



--- Page 127 ---
hazard resistant craps
weather

her hazards

hazarcs come in different forms. The weather con bring too much rainfall,
mM become too cold of it can bring very strong domaging winds. People
elr areas should be able to predict or forecast weather so that they can

on from hazards. Hazards can Ga harm to people: livestock ond the
environment. In Zimbabwe drought, floods, heal waves and tropical
re common weather and climete hazareds.



--- Page 128 ---
ere le no eter for urban use and for inigation.

estack and the environment.
s ond onimals die}.

jure like houses. offices, roads, bridges and railway

ter borne diseases like typhoid, cholera and such others,

pectih ey PE anaaches ‘dehydration. discomfort and fatigue.
_ especially to babies and very old people.

as a hazard

i



--- Page 129 ---
weather and climate hazards that you have leam#.
jdo to reduce the effect of floods around people in towns ang)
A pural areas? |

vou do to help people when there is a heat wave?

t babies and very old people
ood as sea waves
somior to people

C. fouicoleyciona D.. ibutary:


--- Page 130 ---


--- Page 131 ---
D. well
__ aeainer.
Cz _ wailing BD. foretelling

alte = dysentery ~ —. malaria

weather.
B, “understand ¢. control D. revise
of the following is NOT an instrument fo measure Weather?
eather tecord — 6B, thermometer
Loe DB. wind vane
Ty Se0s0ns are here in fimbabwe?
B.  § BD, 4
on 7.6 trees start to develop shoots and leaves?
8, winter C. spring DO. auturnn
osured in
B. centimtras Cc. millimetres D. metres
iewing are seasons excep! :
~ Summer 8. outumn C. winter BD. October

Structured questions

fhat do you understand from the word weather?

ie the word climate.

Nifty hwo Ways In which We can forecast weather.
fi weather forecasl.

Ince etveanth henmornelerc and arain gauge.
weather records?


--- Page 132 ---
Soil, plants and animals

Unit 21 Soil

‘In this unit you will:

Ee identify erganisms living in and on the sail
19. discuss how plants and animals benefit from ine soil

|3. Soke how sail benefits from organisms.

hobilal enganic

| So i important to plants and animals that use soil a5 their habitant. Plants that
| grow on the soil can be classified into groups. These plant foods provide different
Aubien’s. Some animals also ect plants that grow on the soil. There are different
types of animals.and these provide organic matter to the sail. These are classified
into five groups. Some live in woter and some. on fae: This means they have

different habitants.

| Organisms living on
: and in soil

‘Sail provides a habitat for living
‘organisms. An oracnism is a form of
life. such os, plant, animal, bacteria
‘or fungus. Some sol) organiims help
speed up the decay of dead plant
and animal matter. This makes the

Figure 8.1 Sol Is: Important to
plants and-animals ap



--- Page 133 ---
=) Sl ee el ic ‘f tify: erepo risrrss whieh ive on |
spade to ia ond digentiy living organisms in the:

=) living Number of living Number of living,
on soil organisms in soil organisms found |
only in. ond on soil

Vo merely

al.or plant lives. A habilat should hove

| |
y 1. List how they get the following from |



--- Page 134 ---
healthy, They take up the nutnents
niirents ond supplies them to

ates and potassium. Nitrates pron

»need eee healthy plant roots. Plants reg

ita 1a



--- Page 135 ---
nabs live undergroundexcept
B. ants C. dragon fly

See eee mite
$ all the following except

__B. water C. shelter
i that promotes healthy leaf growth is called |

D. wind
hates B. nitrate ©. potassium eat = nutrient
D

eed. fram the soil.
‘ir B. leaves G
panimal that-eats plant roats is call

=. §un
a : eda
insect B. mouse

nutients

Cc. mole ees

le organic matter fo the soil

ond tree branches fall to the ground and decay, Animicils get rid
Sh ciso decays in sail, Many plants and animals die and aecoy in
ecaying plant and animal materials is called organic matter, This

decays with the help of Bacteria to form co material colled hurts:
many important nutnents needed by olants,

of your choice. Ask for permission to collect small samples
ans of plants and animals from the soi his organic matter
fond changes to become humus.

fe fo use rubber gloves when handling the orqanic matter

2 samples in neatly labelled trarispcirent jars.
up of what you found out onc chart.
t People that soil is our heritage, include the vorious
car I the soi.

organisms,
iil,



--- Page 136 ---
nutritional value of different plant food
found in plant foods.

part of cur environment. Soil isa source of plant nutnents and it's a habitat
animals. People grow their plants in the soil, Therefore, people depend on
ants, while plants also depend on the soils.

; long to different groups. Each group has ifs own nutritional value,
fant plant food groups such as: cereals, legumes. root tubers, fruits
ies. Plant food contains nutrients thal are good for health. It ls easy
ser plant foods frarn the way [hey are clossified. Read the lable below

ch shows you the different classes of plant food.

Root tubers
Potatoes/mbotatist

mz ee —_ | Mazhorie

&



--- Page 137 ---
a Seay gfass grown for the purposes of getting Its grains. Cereal grains

od energy. Cereals are regarded as staple crops. Staple crops give
d. The staple food in Zimbabwe comes from the cereal callea maize.
es whole grain arench in vitamins. minerals, carbohydrates. fats, oils and

ene d from is

itrole in Aes bee


--- Page 138 ---


--- Page 139 ---
ing plants. Examples of fruits. inchice
awheries, mange. hacha, nhunduru.,
otohw sku. A fruit is formed from the. ovary
ruits as @ source ot tood. Fruits can be eaten in a raw

leafy vegetable?

food thot is also known a3 green vegeiables. Examples include

mabbage. spinach, covo, funga and mony ofners that we eat at home.
shove a very high fibre content.



--- Page 140 ---
alive of different plants

Ver Us vitamins and minerals: The vitamins help to build ourbones,
and boost our immune system.
shave grains. and the main part of the cereals have starch which make
ohydrates, Carbohydrates give energy to the body.
lubers mostly contain dietary fibre. Dietary fibre is alo called roughage,
| toe nage: is the indigestible portion of food denved from plants. It helps push
ste out of the body.
tegumes provide a range of nutrients that include protein, carbohydrates,
dietary fibre ond minerals and vitamins. They mostly contain protein, Protein
helps build the body,
$. Fruits ore mainly o source of various nutrients that include vitamin C, potassium
and eiefary fb fibre. They Prnte the body from diseases.

ol omtacall and grow one bed of canrotsand anohes


--- Page 141 ---
n green vegetables? —
c “itomin B & vitamin: C

that ore ed at our Sores.
fe eat heel lad fons?

‘5 a eae in cro rotator?

id-on plant food.
ound in different classes ike the lequmes: fruits. vegetables,

warety of plant foods so: that we get different nutrients

plants that give us food at home for our families and in
gMmercial purposes.



--- Page 142 ---
reptiles |

issection, we shail lear about animals called vertebrates. The
ave different classes.

Nel verlebrates to move, to run, to climd
Mave is called backbone or vertebral
backbone are the ones called vertebrates.
ps Gs shown in Figure 8.7. The five groups

ind marrimals. Study the pictures below:



--- Page 143 ---
> Gert Sees ot nee

perature

; (arms and legs, of their equivalent such as wings

nbs which ore called fins. They use
use they con breathe in water. [ney

‘covered with scales. They have lir
ion but the eags bust in water. Fish

1. Fish are very interesting beca
gills. They lay egas for reproduct
blooded.

fish live?
A water. They are adapted inte living in water, Fish also live in fresh water

ivers, lakes and swomps.

s include frogs and toads. Amphibians are cold blooded.
wave scales or hair. Their skin is always moist, They


--- Page 144 ---
mwater and parton land.

snake fortolse

“bata they are vertebrates. Reptile bodies are:
arecathe with lungs. They also lay eqas for reproduction,
ate cold blooded, ae ae a

However, some:
2 50M¢ live in

live in he water like crocodiles do. Some



--- Page 145 ---
istics of birds

ie feathers and have a backbone. | :
ded and they can regulate their body
nd they have wings they use to fly. No!
ostrich.

a nest, Birds live in different habitats like mountains, forests, deserts and
sf water. When the weather changes very much. ikay Paoe Tom

All birels are vertebrates. All toircls
temperature. The fernale
all birds with wings Ty Tor

‘video showing different kinds of vertebrates. Learners watch
describe the features that they see for each group of

ent Cheose (a) or (b)
jon thal has some facts about birds,
he birds.

‘birds and observe their



--- Page 146 ---
ebrates, which means that they have a backbone or spine.
blooded animals, so they regulate their own body temperature.

ive on dry land. Some live in the deserts while some live in
‘aretic wales ond some in mountains. Are you a mammal?’
ne?


--- Page 147 ---
question.
-haracteristic in all vertebrates is they have a
B. skin with scales

DB. tur
(OT a reptile_ a;
8B, snoke Cc. toriose D. bird
‘animal does NOT lay ea95__ 3
B. snake Cc. bird D. monkey
following is NOT a vertebrate? |
B. reptiles C, ants BD. amphibians

ce B. inthe valley

tains DB. inthe village
five groups of vertebrates that we have?
‘of an amphibian.

E of fish collect?
once of ies Jacek in Were Rrales.


--- Page 148 ---


--- Page 149 ---
C.. in the mountains

C. scoles
wing: é a cues?

B. elephant Cc. crocodile
_is a cereal crop.

B. millet C. onion
con fix in the soil.
= B. hydrogen C. carbohydrates D. fruits

ofa tuberisa :
B. rape C, cabbage D, cassava

Structured questions

sxample of reptiles.
mt do we “7 eal ie



--- Page 150 ---
4forms and maps

F

if identify natural and man-made landforms | ;
12. to dislinguish between natural and man-made landforms.

) Flashback

| Atendicrm so feature that's found on the land. It can be man-made ar natural.
Examples of landforms that are found en the earth's surface inciude mouritains,
nls, a volley and mony other

Key words

narmadelandiom map natural landform

A landiorrn is any shape on the eorth’s surface. There are two types of landforms
which Ofe nciuroland man-made landfonms, Naturallandformns include mountains,
Gesers, Volleys and 50 0n, while man-made include skyscraper. bndges, roads
anda so On, Landioms have different purposes and ore important

Natural and man-made landforms


--- Page 151 ---
8 echetie the mounts
ar the mountains or!

contour noges

m sie peaatGiins include ‘a joke, canal. dam, ferace,
en before.

,others. Iry 10 ramember any of these Thal you hove se

ice between man-made landforms and

at the man-made landfonms ore mode by human beings

ference is th
*csurtoce thor ore

» while the agai Joust ore figures on ihe eanh

a plan or diagram of an area of land or sea showing physical features.
" ES a i that Soe an area of ‘land orsea. Do you remember



--- Page 152 ---
on area. “The: higher you go up a
as. People visit such sites and
Honal Parks and Widlite.
Water. collec there intarge amounts and itis
or tourism. Water in the dam can also breed
rant food component in our diet. A canal is used
where pecale do not use hosepipes.

ing table showing fhe man-made landforms and natural)

; Notural landforns
| Mountain



--- Page 153 ---
using papier

of natural landform and make a model

ch con help you to make models of Ihe man-made

glue and pebbles.

sare man-made and natural.
rivers and valleys are natural tandforms, this means that they are

in natural landforms are very important fo us becouse the
y to the earth and the landiorms can become aH



--- Page 154 ---
aris the landforms on fhe ——_____

B. lowerpartal
pb. coldest! doy
“6 madebyanver
: D. made by a mounrain
rally made landforms except
C. trlowtary
mn | ianclforms in Zimbobwe except __ :
B valley Cc. mountain D. canal
h ai can be natural, which means that they

D. dam wall

 __ &B, inside Cc. between b. naturellly

fimbabwe Is :
Cc. Gwayi D.. Manyuchi

Cc. Munyat . Save
Cc. ferace B. centour ridge}

RB. small stones
' D, different soils
fourstcentreis_—

8B. MiNyanga



--- Page 155 ---
inable resource managem ent

- unit you will:

al resources into renewable and n on-renewable resources

rome natural resources in Zimbabwe

a uses of natural resources
different forms of waste and give examples of each respectively
snotural resources in the science comer.

i waste Include electronic gadgets. plants. industrial waste, household

Wy fesources in Our Country. Some of them are renewable and som

le. The renewable and non-renewable resources con be ni t a
some natural resources can be found underground and : oe ies
resources are found at different places. Resources ae j sls iil
= used for differant! purposes that include agricultural Abit


--- Page 156 ---
id Nol enewable resources

because itis

sa n, water (river),

y. Examples of renewable resources are: oxygen.
[vegatation}. biomass and land (soil].

) Exercise A
r). Whatis ao renewable resource?

Give a renewable resource we get fram the sun.

Name the natural resource that can help farmers to grow crops.

in order for crops to grow well they need a natural resource called

Why are natural resources used repeatedly? -

wable resources
Ce cannot be replaced by natural means once used.
s resources are oll, natural gas, minerals such as coal,

stainable because their formation takes

sources should be used wisely.



--- Page 157 ---
hal are non-renewable resources?
ive two examples of non-renewable resources
Menewoble resources should be wed me
non-renewable resources not sustainable?
= hwo renewable resources.

of natural resources



--- Page 158 ---
Seo dyke

4 djtrees €) oi f} platinum g) solar energy


--- Page 159 ---
5

Soli a en important resource e where agnicultural ochvities such

a on farming. We ge! food from, soll and veg

gute 10.4 Vegetation as a notwal resource
as growing of crops

Fkeeping of animats are done: This is very important fo humon life as we all
ation. Woter plays o very

mpotant part in far THHNna, i gating crops and survival of qmimvas



--- Page 160 ---
computers and cellphone devices contain oa variety of
) os copper and precious metals including zinc, platinum,

Bs

2. Ho er important to life?

| 3, Soil is important. Explain how it is important.
4, State two uses of water.
45, eee or cellphone devices use valuable resources such as
Satan —;



--- Page 161 ---
of overproduction, wailing of delaying transportation,
5 wcass and dc defects or things made with damages,



--- Page 162 ---


--- Page 163 ---
mes from plants of gnimal source. Iney commenly include: 9)
9) fruit peels cj vegetables.
pul their organic waste into compost and Use it in gardens:



--- Page 164 ---
‘owe tw two example nes Ol Se
Which waste is useful ond is ee to ut in the garden for our crops to grow



--- Page 165 ---
le resource. |
c. nickel Bp. oll
2 is one that :
B, cannot be replaced
used again Dp. old and usable
mple of a non-renewable resource.

Cc. timber Dp. platinum

ned in hwange.
B. Gold Cc. Diamond
enewable resources no! sustainable?
aiongtimetoform 8. they are cheap
jpol resource i mined at x7
B. diamond C.

D. Coal

D. they are found underground

ciVver Dp. coal



--- Page 166 ---
SY janure
kes OUr homes clean
questions
[2]

rite two which are and -
enewable resources.
[2

: i renewable and nen+

: mined at Hwange. (1] |

ake billions of years TO form. This makes |
(1


--- Page 167 ---
5. stomach ache
'D. position of the tooth |

es pulled out by the dentsl?

number of teeth
Ww il af teeth

B. carbohydrates
DB. waste products

B. infected snail
D. infected lizard
ing danger warning signs in the school yard is to

al made fram hwo or more chemical elements that have

xtureand.a com pound

oparation < ition D. distillation
fa energy.
Pp fectiol C. Sean D. light
following should be present. mae

B. oxygen and water

; D. carbon dioxide and heat



--- Page 168 ---
8. heottolight
BD. sur ight to sound

G. clean brush
ugh cracks in the rocks forms a _____.
a Cc. dam borehole

slream

0 DO DUoeU

fap.

om the gtound is called ;

use of a particular place on a doy fo day basis
here ot a particular place on day to day bass
ona day to day basis |
home at o given place
the highest! raintall?

8. autumn . summer D. spring

companied by heavy rain

femperature

arobiems of weather

nges, it brings different seasons.

eather C. night D. climate
D

___€. dragon fly . tortoise

healthy leaf growthiscalled

te C, potassium D. nutrient
p

nlothe soil? =

}, elephant

D. maize



--- Page 169 ---
Cc. power ines

B, PpoRONOUS Cc... toxic D, not dangernus
fation you find and

- Pe the skin Cc. nails D: hoir
__‘ate found in power stations where they genes electricity,
snerate ‘B. Batteries Cc. Engines . Power stations
le ‘ath are also called bicuspids and they are found on the side

Cc. premolars B, molars.
a qgood source of
C. mineral salts D. proteins
one Labial froma porasitic disease: {
always eating fast |

= D. eating very little food
rough water, It produces hydrogen and


--- Page 170 ---
B. sound energy
D. netic energy

8 teeth to grow |
D. join each other
sus with the fo enable ustorun,

C. combustion D. oxygen
open from its shell?
oundnuts Cc, peds D. beans
19 is NOT on unprotected waoler source?
B. a borehole Cc. a spring DB. dam
from the soil,
8. water € humus D. nutrient

B. Chiredizi Cc. Hwange BD. Chipinge

Paper 2 - » ——s.

fructured questions

be cleaned per day?



--- Page 171 ---
h group of vertebrates

Mammals Amphibian Fish

enc: good for: the € environment?

table.

1 sth wear oiistactiva clothing.
or Sead for fuel to burn?



--- Page 172 ---


