--- Page 1 ---
lcollege press

entures Primary

amily and Heritage
tudies

iS
a
=|
i)
=
S
O
=
®
=z

ibaa” Learner's Boo
alazi <



--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
Ventures Primary Family and Heritage Studies Learner’s Book Grade 2

© R. Chiwawu and B. Mlalazi, 2017
© Design College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd, 2017

stored in a rét{¥gval system, or tran8mitted in any form
or by any, , electronic, photocopying, recording,
or othefWise, v@ithout the pri n permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyright Act, (Chapter 26:05), 2004.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable for criminal prosecution and
civil claims for damages.

All rights reserved. Vg part of thifpatl tion may be reproduced,

First published 2017

Published by
College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd
P. O. Box 3041, Harare, Zimbabwe

Typeset in Century Gothic: 14 pt
Artworks by: A Mandaza and K. Ngundu
Cover image by National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe
Printed by
Sable Press (Pvt) Ltd

ISBN: 978-77900-713-1
Acknowledgements

The authors and publishers would like to acknowledge A. Mangwiro, MAC, National Archives of Zimbabwe, Reserve bank of
Zimbabwe and Harare Agricultural Show 2016 and Zimpapers for permission to use some of the photographs in this book.

The publishers have made every effort to trace the copyright holders. If they
have inadvertently overlooked any, they will be pleased to make the
necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.

It is illegal to photocopy any page of this book without written permission from the publishers.



--- Page 4 ---
Topic 1

Topic 2

Topic 3

Topic 4

Topic 5

Identity: Family history and local heritage ..................00008 ]

AAVantages Of lIVING IN O FAMILY... ee eceeeseeeececeeeeesessseseeees ]

REIOTIVES 0... .eeeccssssssccececeesesssseeeeccecesesessssessescecesensetssessceceseeaaas 2

Relationships between the family and the community ... 4

FAMIly NOPMS ANC VAIVES........ceeesssccceeesseeeeeessseeecsessessceessness 7

INCGIQENOUS FOPMING TOOIS.........ccssseccceessecceesssseeecessstesseensaneas 10
End of topic ASSESSMENT TEST.........cccseesscccseeseesesssssssscseeeeesaaes 1]
Cultural heritage ...............ceessssccccesssssseeceeeeesssseeecceeseessceeesens 12
UNNU/UDUNTU/VUMUNNU .......ccsscecccceeeessssncscessccessssssssesssessenes 12
Important aspects of village and community culture...... 15
SCNOOI FUlES ....eeeccccessssssseeeeccesessssseeeeceeeessessseeesseceeeesessasesess 16
INGIGENOUS ANA MOCEFN GAMES .......cc:ccccesesssssesessssscseesaeees 18
End of topic ASSESSMENT TEST.........ccccceesssccsessssscsessssseeseesenees 20
National history, sovereignty and governance.................. 21
NOtional ANTHEM ........cccccccesssssccesessseeecesssseseceesssssscessessseceeeas 2]
National SYMDOIs ..........cccccceeeseesssssssssssssscceccccceecececceeeceeeeeeteees 24
National events ANd Celebrations .........cccccsssscceessseceeeees 25
National SCNOO! PICA GE... ceesescccccessssscessssssecssssssseceeesaeees 28
Ethnic QroUps ANC IONQUAGES ........cccceecsseeessssssesessssseceeeneees 29
End of term One ASSESSMENT TEST........ccccccceesssssssesssssceseesseees 3]
Entitlements/rights and responsibilities..................:cccseeeees 33
Entitlements, rights ANd responsibilities... eeeeeseeeeeseeees 33
Roles At NOME ANC At SCHOO] .........ccsssecccceceessssseceeseseeeseseees 35
ENd of topic ASSESSMENT TEST..........cceessssceseesessesssssesceseeseseuas 38
0) |) ee 39
NGO fOr SNEITED..... ce cecceessssssseccccceesssssecessceceesesssssceseceeeesaaas 39
Effects of family size ON SNEITEL oo... eeecscseeesssseceessseseseesaees 42
Shelter at home and in the neighbourhood .......ceeeeeeeeees 43
Shelter AN NEritaGe SITES... eeeesseceesssseceeeesssesseeeesseseees 44

End Of tOpic ASSESSMENT TEST.........ccceecsecccsseeseeesssssscscesesseeaaes 45



--- Page 5 ---
Topic 6 Social services and volunteerism ...............cccccsssccscccssseeseees 46
The role of the community in helping the vulnerable....... 46
End of topic ASSESSMENT TESH........cceesssccsessssscscesseeceeeesacees 48
Topic 7 Production, distribution and consumption of goods
ONC SEPVICES 0.0000... eccccsssseesesssssssereneeessecccessecesscesssscssseensssees 50
Indigenous and modern methods of growing,
NAPVESTING ANC STOLING FOO.........ccccesscceessssssseesssesecsessanens 50
Indigenous methods of Preserving FOO uu... eceeseeeeeeeseees 54
USES Of MONEY .......ccccccecssssssssssssssssssssssseceecececeseseeeeeseeeeseeeteees 55
End of topic ASsessMeNt teSt ......cccecssccccessssccccesssecceeeeseees 56
End of term two ASSESSMENT TES .....ccccsccseeeessssescceeeeeeeseseees 56
Topic 8 Transport and COMMUNICATION.................cccccccessessscsesssseees 58
MOCES Of TONSPOMT..... ee cccceeessssscessescecssssssseccsscessssssnseeeeeeees 58
Workers and occupations in the transsport industry......... 61
TrOPFIC FULCS..... cs ceeescccessseccsssseccesseecessseecessssscecsssscecssssessasecesseeees 63
Means Of COMMUNICATION .........ceescccceeessssseessssecseessteeesessaes 65
ENd of topic ASSESSMENT TEST.........ccceesssccccecesssssssececceeeeeeseaes 67
Topic 9 Work And leisure.................ccccccssssssscccssssssssscssssessscsecsessesessees 68
Kinds of work iN The COMMUNITY .......ceeeccceessscecseesereceeeeeseees 68
Types of leisure in the home, at school and in the
COMMUDNITY........ccccccccecssssssscescccccsssssssesssesecsesssateeseseeeeettetteess 70
INGIQENOUS ANA MOCEIN GAMES .........csccsceesssssesssecsessseseenees 73
ENd Of topic ASSESSMENT TEST........ccececssssscccescesssssscececeeeeseeteas 75
TOpic 10. Global isSueS ...............cssssesscccesessscrseccesscsssssccssscessssecessesesenees 76
FIOOS 0... sessccccsssssscccessssseceeeesseeeecessseeeceeessessccsscssssasecsnaeeseesaees 76
DeETOreSTOTION .......ccessccesssccessssecesseccesssscecsssscecssecesescestsaeeeeaees 78
ENd Of topic ASSESSMENT TEST.........ccccesssssccccsessssssceceeeseeeeeaes 80
End of Year ASSESSMENT TEST ........ceeesceessssceesssesesssecssteeeesaes 80
QUIZ ..........eeeesssssensssccccceccececeeseceesenssscceceesessssssscssscscssssssssssssacens 82



--- Page 6 ---
1. Describe the family in the picture above.

2. Tell the class about your own family.

3. Name the indigenous kitchen utensils you can see in the picture.

Key words

community relatives celebrate

1A. Advantages of living in a family

This is the Chuma family. They all
live together. It is good to live as a
family. People live in a family to help
one another. The family is working
together. If makes the work easier. It
brings about unity.

People who live in a family spend

time together. They learn to care for |

one another. They learn to love one
another. Family members will share
important things. They can share ideas.
They can teach each other about

tools

respect

discipline



--- Page 7 ---
their family. Children learn what is good within the family. People live
in a family to help each other in so many ways.

Activity 1

1. Collect pictures of people working as families.
2. Watch videos of people working as families. How are they
helping each other?

Exercise 1

It is to live together as a family. (good/bad)
We live as a family to each other. (fight/help)
Working together makes work . (Nard/easier)
People living in a family learn to for one another.
(care/steal)

Family members can share

1B. Relatives

Families have relatives. These are members of the extended family.
Some live near us but others live far away.

My relatives

PoON>

n

things. (important/bad)

Father's mother » Grandmother
Mother’s mother > Grandmother
Mother's father >» Grandfather
Father's father ~~.» Grandfather

Mother's sister a Ait
Father's sister » Aunt
Mother’s brother oy ; UNCle
Father's brother ~~.» Uncle

Look at the relatives in the picture. They are a big and happy family.



--- Page 8 ---
© You can show your relatives on a family tree. Look at Davidzo’s family
tree. It shows her grandparents, parents, uncles, aunts, brother and
sister.

Granafather Grandmother Grandfather Grandmother
Moyo Moyo Shumba Shumba
| Aunt Clara Uncle Simba Uncle Tafuma} | Aunt Tuyiko

Importance of relatives

_ Relatives help us in times of sadness. They help when there is sickness
or death in a family.

“Grandmother, aunt Clara, uncle Matt and mother have come to visit
Ashton in hospital. He has malaria. He is happy to see his relatives. He

feels loved.



--- Page 9 ---
Relatives also gs
Us in times of hapgi
They come to pe
and weddings. Te
is Rudo and Akae
wedding. Their relativ
have come to 4
wedding. They ha
many presents
Rudo and Akani. Au
Tsakani has a_stoy
Grandmother Moy
has some clay po
The uncles also hay
presents for Rudo ar

ave also brought presents. The relatives si

Akani. Other relatives h
and dance happily.

1. Draw your family tree showing your grandparents, aunts and
Uncles.

2. IN groups, come Up with a drama on the importance of relative

3. Present your drama in class. You can record your drama if you
have the equipment.

. My mother’s fatheris my. - (grandmother/grandfathe!
. [call my father’s brother . (aunt/uncle)

- |call my mother's sister . (aunt/uncle)
Relatives when we are sick.(help/laugh)
. Relatives bring to weddings. (sadness/presents)

OBhwWh—

1C. Relationships between the family and the

community

Different families make a community. This is a group of people livin
togetherina place. A community is like a big family. Each family has:

part to play in the community. People work together ina community
They share what they have.



--- Page 10 ---
Families in a community talk together. The picture shows a village
“meeting. The people share ideas here. Some communities have
“meeting places like halls and the dare/idale. They meet here to talk
about their community.

Sharing / «~~

The people in the picture are fetching water. They are at a
community tap. They use the tap together. People in a community
share what they have. They all help to keep the place clean. They
also share things like sports grounds and clinics.



--- Page 11 ---
Working together

In the picture, people from different families are working together fe
build a school. Families in a community take part in the activities of the
community. Each family brings what they have.

The Shumba family brought their scotch cart. It is being used to ca
the sand for building. The Chuma family brought their donkeys. The
donkeys are pulling the cart. The Ncube family brought their three
legged pots. The food for the people who are working is cooked i
the pots.

Mrs Masamba and Mr Takura are builders. They are building the wall

Helping one another

ga Mr Mbare is not feeling well
He has a cold. Other people in
the village are coming to visit
him. They will helo the family
to weed their maize plot.

Families in a community help
each other. They helo each
other in happiness. They
help each other in sadness.
When there is a funeral other

families come to comfort the family. In times of happiness families in a
community celebrate together. To celebrate is to do things that you
enjoy. You do them to remember something important.



--- Page 12 ---
Dramatise how members of a family take part in different
activities in their community. If you can, record your presentation
and share with others at home.

' Watch videos of families taking part in community activities. Talk
~ about what the families are doing.

- Collect pictures of communities working together. Make a class
collage by pasting your pictures onto a chart. Display your chart.

<ercise 3
A community is like a big . (nouse/family)
Different make a community. (families/scotch carts)
E Each has a part to play in the community. (hut/family)

in a community people what they have. (fight for/share)
Members of a community should one another. (help/fight)

1D. Family norms and values

seach family there are some good things we should do. These things
9w we are good children. The way we do things may be different

5m one family to another. Look at the pictures.

lespect
andmother is visiting. Peter has respect
>, others. He opens the door for
sandmother. He welcomes grandmother.
We should always respect our elders. We
hhould always respect one another. How
an you show respect to others?



--- Page 13 ---
Greetings

(LS SY am fine my
How are yOu \} grandchildren. =

grandfather? }| How are you?

Look at the pictures. The people are greeting one another.
show that we care for others. Greetings show love. People gree
other in many different ways. How do you greet people?

Discipline

Children should do the right things. They should have dis
Children with discipline follow rules.

Well done Tiyisani.
Keep on being a
good boy.



--- Page 14 ---
® i orize giving day at school. Tiyisani and Faith are receiving prizes.
=y are receiving prizes for being good children. They are good

dren at home and at school. They greet elders. They listen to their
Sachers. They follow school rules. We should all be good children.
at else do good children do?

ard work

Well done Kudzai.
Keep on working

sorize giving day Kudzai and Zwanga got prizes too. They got prizes
Pworking hard. They do all their school work. They do it neatly. They
for more work from the teachers. Kudzai and Zwanga also work
d at home. They help their parents at home after school. Their
ments are proud of them. Good children work hard.

Go into your groups. Do a role play to show discipline and
respect.

Your teacher will show you some videos about children. Are the
children being good?
Role play on greetings.



--- Page 15 ---
- We should always

one another. (fight/respect)
- Greeting people is d

1

2 '_. (good/ba )

3. Greeting one another shows , (Care/anger)
4. Children with discipline

§,

rules, (follow/break)
Where should children work hard?

IE. Indigenous farming tools
People started f i
are things we use to do work. The

- Farming to
. They make farming easier. Most of the to,
from long ago are still be

Axe (sanhu/ihloka)

SS
This is a hoe. It is Used for weeding.
It is also Used for digging.

The axe is used f

Or Cutting trees q
bushes,

Harvesting baskets are f
crops when harvesting.

Or putting The wooden

plough was used for |
tilling the land.

Itisno longer used ne

Machete (bhemba/ibhemba)

The machete is Used for cutting and
chopping.

The threshing stick is Used for lifting
and threshing.



--- Page 16 ---
Activity 5
1. Draw an indigenous tool. Write its name.
Make a model of any indigenous farming tool of your choice.
. Tell the class what you have made.
Demonstrate how your model tool works.
i ag videos of some indigenous tools. What is each tool used
» for?

=xercise 5
|. Tools are things we use to do .(games/work}

Farming tools are used when . (playing/farming)
was used to till the land long ago. (tractor/wooden

A
plough)

This is an
lt is used for.

End of topic assessment test

Choose the correct answer.

. People live as a family to one another. (hit/help) .
Working together as a family makes work . (narder/easier)
My father’s brother is my . (grandfather/uncle)

Sickness is a time of in a family. (happiness/sadness)

espect families machete Farming tools hoe help

5. Different living together in a place make a community.
6. Families in a community should each other.
7. Welcoming visitors shows ,

This is a

are used when farming.
is used for cutting and chopping.



--- Page 17 ---
1 Topic Cultural heritage

1. Describe the picture.
2. How do you greet elders in your culture? Show the class.

Key words

honest humble folktales funeral united rules

Humility

Mrs Chemugarira is a ward councillor. She is cleaning the street. S$

is with learners from Zvemberi School. She is doing some communi
work.



--- Page 18 ---
Councillor Chemugarira likes to helo her community. She is a humble

‘©ader. She is a good leader. We must all be humble.

esty

| oop kb Alright my child.
Oh no. That is MOITNET, | DIOKE Be careful next
‘Hide that cup bad. | will tell the purple cup. time.
defore mother || mother when she
me COMES. comes back.

=

SSS ee eee eee un cunenee|

pnke broke a cup. What does she do? She is an honest girl. Someone
mo is honest always tells the truth. She tells mother when she comes
ack. We should always tell the truth.



--- Page 19 ---
- Go into Qroups. -
Each 9FOUDP should do

leader.
Visitors.
5. Children should work hard at and at



--- Page 20 ---
Grandfather Mbambo has died.
There is a funeral. A funeral is
done to bury the dead. His family,
friends and neighbours are at
the funeral. People who come
to. funerals comfort the family.

They also come to help with the
_ work.

Communities celebrate together. To
celebrate isto do things you enjoy.
It is done to show that something
is special. Sometimes people sing

ceremony. It is called inxwala in
Ndebele. When people celebrate
together they stay united.

enildren learn good manners fr the pictures.
zandfather and grandmother are talking to the children. They are

sling them how to be good children. This is called kuraya/ukulaya.

sometimes elders tell the children folktales (ngano/inganekwane})
oiktales teach good manners.



--- Page 21 ---
Take turns to tell a folktale you know.
Talk about what the folktales teach.

Watch some folktale cartoons. What lessons do you get from eac
Do a role play on the first fruits ceremony (inxwala).

PON>

1. People come to funerals to the family. (laugh at/comfort
2. People who celebrate togetherremain . (United/divide
3. can be used to teach good manners. (Beating/ Folktal
4. Communities celebrate things that are . (bad/special
5. Who can teach children good manners?

2C. Schoolrules §

Schools have rules. Rules tell us what we must do. They also tel
what we must not do. Read the school rules in the box. What must
learners do? What must the learners not do?

School rules

1. Place litter in a bin. 2. Come to school early.
3. Respect your teachers. 4. Do not fight.
5. Do not climb on the fence. 6. Do not write on the walls.

A school without rules can be a dangerous place. Look at the scha

in the picture.



--- Page 22 ---
The learners do not follow school rules. They throw litter everywhere.
The school is very dirty. Dirt makes the school unsafe. The learners fight
and hurt each other. They write on the walls. They make.the walls dirty.
They climb on the fence and fall.

~

the teachers. They respect one another. ane e schoel| is asafe place now.

ff is important to follow rules. Rules help us to keep e school clean.
Rules help us to keep order. Rules are also for our protection.

Activity 3

1. Make a list of your classroom rules.
. Do arole play on breaking school rules. You can record your play

and take some photographs.

Exercise 3

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.
follow dangerous safe bin fight
1. Aschool without rules is a place.



--- Page 23 ---
Learners should rules.

Learners should not
You should place litter in a
Rules make the school a

arwhd

place.

2D. Indigenous and modern games

We have many games. We olay indoor games. Indoor games |
played inside a room. We play outdoor games. Outdoor games '
olayed outside a room. Each game has its own rules. Do you

games? Name the games you like.

Indigenous games

Zai rakaora Zvamutsana muchuru tsuro nem



--- Page 24 ---
The children are playing games. They are having fun. Do you know
the games they are playing? What do you call the games in your
language? There are many other games from long ago that children
can play. Boys and girls can play the same games.

Modern games

Computer game (racing cars Jigsaw puzzle

The children are playing modern games. Which of the games can you
play? There are many other modern games that children can play.
Boys and girls can play the same modern games.

Playing games is fun. We learn many good things from games. We
share with others when we play games. We also mix with others. We
fearn to follow rules.

©


--- Page 25 ---
1. Choose an indigenous game and play it with your friends. Whe
does the game teach you? .

2. Choose a modern game and play it with your friends. What dos
the game teach you?

3. Watch videos of children playing games. Which games are the

olaying?

Exercise 4

We can play indigenous and games. (old/modern)
games are olayed inside a room. (Outdoor/Indoor)

Playing games is _ (boring/fun)

What do games teach us to follow? (roads/rules)

We and with others when We play games.

Abwh>

End of topic assessment test

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.
_ Children are taught manners. (good/bad)

. We must our elders. (greet/beat)

_ Learners must school rules. (disobey/obey)
. When someone dies people help to him. (bury/hif)
Some stories teach children to elders. (hate/respect)

OAPwd>

united safe elders modern respect

6. When you follow rules YOU teachers.

7. Snooker is a game.

8. Rules help us to stay .

9. Who can teach children good manners?

10.A community that celebrates together stays .



--- Page 26 ---
. What is in the picture?
2 Name the national colours for Zimbabwe.

"
|

Key words

national anthem symbol event hero
heroine history national flag

_3A. National anthem

mbabwe has a song. It is called the national anthem. It talks about
Zimbabwe. The national anthem is about Zimbabwe. It stands for our
history. History is about the past. It tells the story of Zimbabwe. It talks
about what the people of Zimbabwe want for their country. It unites
The people of Zimbabwe.

“Here is the national anthem in Shona, Ndebele and English.

®



--- Page 27 ---
Shona: Ngaikomborerwe nyika yeZimbabwe

Simudzai mureza wedu weZimbabwe
Yakazvarwa nemoto wechimurenga;
Neropa zhinji ramagamba
Tiidzivirire kumhandu dzose;
Ngaikomborerwe nyika yeZimbabwe.

Tarisai Zimbabwe nyika yakashongedzwa
Namakomo, nehova, zvinoyevedza
Mvura ngainaye, minda ipe mbesa
Vashandi vatuswe, ruzhinji rugutswe;
Ngaikomborerwe nyika yeZimbabwe.

Mwari ropafadzai nyika yezimbabwe
Nyika yamadzitateguru edu tose;
Kubva Zambezi kusvika Limpopo,
Navatungamiriri vave nenduramo
Ngaikomborerwe nyika yeZimbabwe

Phakamisan’ ifulegi yethu yeZimbabwe
Eyazalwa yimpi yenkululeko;

Legaz’ elinengi lamaghawe efhu;
Silivikele ezitheni zonke;

Kalibusisiwe ilizwe leZimbabwe.

Khangelan’ iZimbabwe yon’ ihlotshisiwe
Ngezintaba lange miful’ ebukekayo,
Izulu kaline, izimilo zande;

Iz'sebenzi zenam’ abantu basuthe;
Kalibusisiwe ilizwe leZimbabwe.

Nkosi busis’ ilizwe lethu leZimbabwe
llizwe labokhokho bethu thina sonke;
Kusuk’ eZambezi kusiy’ eLimpopo
Abakhokheli babe lobugotho;
Kalibusisiwe ilizwe leZimbabwe.

a 22



--- Page 28 ---
ey

On lift, high, our flag of Zimbabwe
Born of the fire of the revolution
And of the precious blood of our heroes
Let’s defend it against all foes

: Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

Behold Zimbabwe so richly adorned
With mountains and rivers, beautiful

Let rain abound and fields yield the seed
May all be fed and workers rewarded
Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

Oh, God bless the land of Zimbabwe
The land of our heritage
From the Zambezi to the Limpopo

| May our leaders be just and exemplary
Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

_ We should respect the national anthem. We should stand at attention
when we sing the national anthem.

We sing the national anthem each day at the start of school. We
Sing the national anthem on national holidays. The national anthem
& sung at important national events. We sing the national anthem

©

:


--- Page 29 ---
on national sporting events. Radio and television stations play 7
national anthem. They play the national anthem when they start
day. They play the national anthem when they end the day.

Activity 1

1. Sing the national anthem in different languages.
2. Show how you stand when singing the national anthem.
3. Listen to the national anthem on the radio or on television.

Exercise 1

Choose the correct answer.

1. The song for our country is the . (national anthem/natio
pledge)

2. We should the national anthem. (respect/record)

3. When do we sing the national anthem at school? (breakti
start of school)

4. We stand at when singing the national anthem. (attentior
school)

5. The national anthem stands for our . (history/school)

3B. National symbols

Do you remember what the song for Zimbabwe is called? It is
national anthem. We sing the’ national anthem when we raise
national flag. The national flag is a piece of cloth that stands

Zimbabwe.



--- Page 30 ---
There are five colours on the national flag. These are red, black, white
yellow and green. They are Zimbabwe's national colours.

The national flag is a national symbol. The Zimbabwe Bird is also a
national symbol. They both stand for Zimbabwe.

tar av arava,
ee)
Ca¥ av Aare Fav,

Zimbabwe Bird

National flag

We can see the Zimbabwe Bird on many things.

Activity 2

1. Draw the national flag. Colour it in.
Collect things that have the Zimbabwe bird. Display them in class.

Exercise 2

Choose the correct answer.

F stand Zimbabwe Bird banknotes nationalflag five
1. The and are national symbols.

National symbols for Zimbabwe.

3. How many colours are on the national flag?

4 Where can we find the Zimbabwe Bird?

va :
3C. National events and celebrations

Some events are important to all Zimbabweans. They are national
ents. The people of Zimbabwe celebrate together on these events.



--- Page 31 ---
The calend
red.

8 9 10 11 12 18 14 § 6 7
146 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 26 26 27 28

29 30 31

12 38 4 6 6 1 2
7 8 9 10 11 12 18 4 66 7 8 28
14 18 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13
21 22 23 24 25 26 27

26 27 28

10 11 12 13 14 18 16
417 18 19 20 21 22 23

24 28 26 27 28 29 30 29 30 31

Independence Day

We celebrate Independence Dayonl18A

got its independence.

8 93 10 11
12 13 14 18 16 17 18
49 20 21 22 23 24 25

14 15 16 17
18 19 20 21 22 23 24

28 29 30 31 25 26 27 28 29 30
— 42 123 4 6 6
3465 6 7 8 8 s 9 10 11 12 13 14

15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28

5

42 18 14 18 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 16
26 27 28 29 30 31 23

3 1

2

9 10 11 12 18 14 15
46 17 18 19 20 21 22 20
23 24 28 26 27 28 29 27

30

5

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 10
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 17
26 27 28 29 30 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

ar below shows some national events for 2017. They are &

6 7

3.4

31

6 7

8 9 10 11 23 4 65 6 7 8
8 10 11 12 13 14 15
17 18 19 20 21 22
24 25 26 27 28 29

30

4 2 3 4 5
5 6 7 8 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
43 14 15 16 17 18 19
Q1 22 23 24 26 26
28 29 30 31

12 3 4 1 2
8 9 10 11 3 4 65 6 7 8 9
41°12 13 14 18 16
48 19 20 21 22 28

oril. This is the day Zimbab


--- Page 32 ---
Heroes Day

We celebrate Heroes Day on the second Monday of August every
year. On this day we remember the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe.
These are people who did something great for Zimbabwe.

There are many heroes and heroines buried at thegNational-Heroes

“Acre. These people were very important for Zin lbabweé. Here are
some of the heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe. 37 NL

ai _-

Joshua Nkomo Julia Zvobgo



--- Page 33 ---
Josiah Tongogara

Activity 3

Talk about how you take partin national events in your communi
As a class, dramatise any one national event or celebration.
Watch videos of people celebrating Independence and Here
Day. What are the people doing?
. Take part in Independence Day and Heroes Day celebrations
your community.

Take a trip to the National Heroes Acre or a Provincial Here
Acre near you. Write down what you see.

a Bp WNo

Exercise 3

Choose the correct answer.
heroes national Independence Day Heroes Day heroine

1. The people of Zimbabwe celebrate events together.
2. On 18 April we celebrate .

3. What do we celebrate on the second Monday of August?
4. National___ and are buried at the National Heroes Ac

3D. National school pledge

In Zimbabwe we have a national schoo! pledge. We salute when
recite the national school pledge. The pledge unites us. We promise
work hard in the national pledge. We must stand correctly when doi

the national pledge.



--- Page 34 ---
aa cathe:

Here is the national school pledge:

Almighty God, in whose hands our future lies.
lsalute the national flag.
! commit to honesty and the dignity of hard work.

Activity 4

1. Recite the national school pledge with your class.

Exercise 4

. We when we say the national school pledge.
Our national school pledge Us as a nation.
In the national school pledge we the national flag.
We commit and in the national school pledge.



--- Page 35 ---
3E. Ethnic groups and languages

There are many groups of people in Zimbabwe. These people spet
different languages. Hear what these children say.

My name is Zvisinei. | am Ndau. | spe¢
Ndau.

My name is Khanyisa. lam Ndebele.
| speak Ndebele.

My name is Tadakadzwa. | am Zezuru. |My name is Chabota. | am Tonga.
| soeak ZezurU. | speak Chilonga.

Khanyisa and Chabota go to the same school. Each morning f
reet one another in their languages. Khanyisa says, “Livuke nj¢

Chabota?” Chabota says, “Mwabuka biyeni, Khanyisa?”
We should respect each other's language.

Here are some greetings in different languages at different times

the day.
Language
Xitsonga

Himisho Hihlekani Madhamba
Mwatakatira Mwabirawal

Ndau Ngariyedze

Kalanga Mamukatiini Makwatiini Makwaijint
Zezuru Marara sei Maswera sei Maswera sel
Chilonga Mwalbuka biyeni Mwayusa biyeni Kwasiya
Ndebele Livuke njani Litshone njani Litshone njan

ta



--- Page 36 ---
Activity 5

1. Greet each other in different languages.
2. Listen to people greeting each other in different languages on
the radio. Say what the people are saying.

Exercise 5

1. People in Zimbabwe speak languages.
each other's language.
are languages spoken in Zimbabwe.
4. How many groups of people are there in Zimbabwe?

“~\

End of topic assessment test

Choose the correct answer.

National anthem respect attention Zimbabwe Bird National flag
The song for Zimbabwe is the ,
and are national symbols.
We should the national anthem.
We stand at when singing the national anthem.

is a colour on the national flag. (Brown/Red)
We celebrate Heroes Day on ___. (18 April/the second Monday of
August)
People of Zimbabwe national events together. (hate/
celebrate)
We celebrate on 18 April. (Independence Day/Heroes
Day)
In the national school pledge we the national flag. (salute/
commit to)
10. People in Zimbabwe speak

ley
INI,

ae N SA RON =

languages. (the same/different)

sof

End of term one assessment test

hoose the correct answer.

. It is good to live as a family because you each other. (help
beat)
| call my father’s father . (old man/grandfather)

3. My mother’s sister is my . (BIg mother/aunt)



--- Page 37 ---
each other

_ Relatives should
laugh at)

(house/community}
6. People ina community should

(share/fight for)

ae
9, Someone who is honest always tells
10.Folk tales teach mann

safe)
12.Games teach us tO follow
13.We should all each oO
14.The national
oledge)

basket)

(Family/ National)

(Mondays/18 Aoril)

5. Agroup of families living together in a place make a .

7. people celebrate together. (Divided/United)

This is . (threshing stick/wooden plough)

et
ers. (good/bad)
11.Following rules makes the school a

ene
ther’s language. (speak/respece
is the song for Zimbabwe. (anthem/

15.1he is a national symbol. (Zimbabwe Bird/harvesting

16.How many colours are on the national flag? (six/five)
events are important to all people of Zimbabwe.

18.Zimbabweans celebrate independence on

19.What do Zimbabweans celebrate on the second Monday of
August? (Heroes Day/National Heroes Acre)
20.Heroes and heroines of Zimbabwe are buried at the

(Great Zimbabwe/National Heroes Acre)

in times of sadness. (help

what they have.

. (lies/the 1U
place. (dangerous/

, (nothing/rules)



--- Page 38 ---
Topic Entitlements, rights and responsibilities

Look at the pictures. Which of the things can you not live without?
Which of the things can you live without?

Key words

rights responsibility respect support protection

4A. Entitlements, rights and responsibilities

Children have special rights. These are the things all children must
have.

My name is Vusa.
What is your

name?


--- Page 39 ---
le

We have a right to shelter. We all have a right to edu

Children have other rights too. They have a right to clothes. They
a right to be loved.

Children’s responsibilities

Children have responsibilities. These are things children must do.
should always tell the truth. We should listen to our elders. What on
responsibilities can you think of?

Thank you. What
a good boy! You
are obedient and
honest .

Here are the
tomatoes and the
change. mother.

Mother sends Chipo to the market. He is obedient. He listens
mother. He goes to the market happily. Chipo is honest. An ha
oerson always talls the truth. He brings back all the change.

oS



--- Page 40 ---
A rhyme

Responsibilities

Responsibilities, responsibilities.
Do you have responsibilities?
Do | have responsibilities?
. Do weall have responsibilities?
: Yes. Every child has responsibilities.
To respect other people's rights.
To be obedient children.
e To be honest and always tell the truth.
To love and care for others.
Above all to work hard in everything we do.

Activity 1

. Learn the poem on responsibilities. Present it to the whole school
during assembly. .
Divide yourself into groups. Each group must do a drama on
children's responsibilities. You can record your presentations using
phones and cameras if you have them.

. Find out and sing songs on responsibilities.

Exercise 1

. Every child has . (money/rights)
Going to school is a right to . (education/food)
. We must other people's rights. (resoect/hate)
4. State any two children’s responsibilities.
. Children have aright to a certificate (birth/death)



--- Page 41 ---
s at home

Children’s role

a a.

oS eo
in the past boys and girls had different roles. Cooking, cleani

house and fetching water were girls’ roles. Boys’ roles were he
cattle, chopping frewood, milking cows and mending fences.
children’s roles are the same. Both boys and girls can do thes

roles.
Children’s role

s at school

eer

aoe —
nm
N ota =
fp


--- Page 42 ---
We do different tasks at school. We clean our classrooms. We clean
the school yard. We pick litter around our surroundings. We water
the flowers and garden plants. Sometimes we work as groups. Some
classes have duty rosters. A duty roster shows which group is on duty.
Boys and girls can do the same roles at school.

Look at the duty roster below. It is for Grade 2 Blue at Phakamani
School. It shows how they take turns to clean their classroom.

_ Group on duty

Buffaloes

Lions
Rhinos
Elephants
Leopards

~ How many groups are there?
.§ What day is it today?
Which group is going to clean the classroom?

~ Make alist of children's roles at home and at school.

_ Watch videos of people working at home and school. What are
the children doing?

Find pictures of children doing different roles. Paste them onto a
chart for display.

ercise 2
Roose the correct answer.

erent work same _ girls herding cattle
Roles are the we do.
in the past boys and girls had roles.
in the past cooking was for

in the past was a role for boys.
Oday boys and girls do the roles.



--- Page 43 ---
1.

2

3.
4. Being obedient is a
5. An honest person

6.
7
8
9
1

End of topic assessment test

Choose the correct an

swe
are things
Rights)

_ All children have a right to

are the things C

_ In the past boys and girls had

r
that all children must have. (Responsibiliti€

. (lies/tells the truth)
are the work that we do. (Rights/Roles)

_ In the past cooking was for
_ Today boys and girls have
0.At school boys and girls can do

(good food/sweets).
hildren must co. (Rights/Responsibilities
, (responsibility/right)

roles. (different/the sa
. (girls/boys)

roles. (different/the same}
roles. (the same/diffe



--- Page 44 ---
iN Nw

e

: Vay tN,

Tis happening in the picture?
do people and animals need shelter?

vords

Need for shelter

Bond animals need shelter. A shelter is a home. There are many
= types of shelter for people and animals.

Efor people



--- Page 45 ---
Shelter for animals

spider web

anthill

There are many other types of animal shelter.

o



--- Page 46 ---
Activity 1

IN groups, make a model of any shelter.

- Tell the class about the shelter you have made.
Display your model in class.

Move around the community and see the different shelters for
animals and people.

mider web



--- Page 47 ---
5B. Effects of family size on shelter

Look at the Pictures of the two fa
house has t

Ooms are enough for the fam}
Mhofu family is bigger than the Sizib
They need more space because th
A bigger family needs more space. As the family grows, people
more huts and bigger houses. They do this to
family members Move out to start
extend their houses. To extend is to
be extended there will be too man

Exercise 2

Choose the correct answer.

create homes make build

1. A big family needs more ,

2. People bigger houses and more h

3. IN towns People extend their house to
it bigger.

ve out to start new

space

Uts to create more sp

more space
4. Toextenda house is to

S. Other family members may mo



--- Page 48 ---
Look at the pictures. Name the different shelter. Which shelter is
found at home? Which shelter is found at schoo

|?

nich shelter is found at your school?

me shelter of the same size? |

= your friends, compare the shelter at your school with that in the
ture.

. It is shelter at
is a shelter found at school. (cooking hut/classroom)
is shelter at home and at school. (granary/garage)



--- Page 49 ---
Vv 5D. Shelter and heritage sites

found in Harare ae IS A Heroes Acre in euch o at specia|
| | Is the Nationa} Heroes A Province, Th

Great Zimbabwe is also a special place. It is an old city. It was k
long ago. The people used stones to build the walls. Zimbabwe go
name from this city.



--- Page 50 ---
BUIsN JING BIOM SMANDQUIZ JOSIN JO s|IOM SUL *g
~~" UL S| QIDW SOOJOH JOUCIJON SUL °Z

D SOY BMQNQUIZ Ul POUIAGIG YOO °9

ZOLIS SHOJUSY YDIUM WOd DLUDU St! 1O6 SMQODQquz °g¢
v

€

(4

L

éJOBBiq {1 DyOW OC} Ssnoy 0 CJ OP ajdosd op jouMm *
~~" gJOW speeu Ajilupl JeBBIiG v °
JO{OUS JOWIUD DIO” — HO OUD—“‘ USC
JO,JOUS UODUNY DIO” —CSCSCSC CTL.UUKD—“‘ STO~OCOY
eopds) aldyse0ldH AaMQDqUIZ4IDaIy = ny Jud}
DOM IQOIOS ,WWYNP SAYS VY UY fO7 YG

“IOMSUD $93.09 ayy asooys)

19} JUSWUSsassp Dido} Jo pug

(QUO}s/}DUQ) *s||IOM POY eManquiiz JOSH
/3JDW S80J98H |DOUOILON) ‘o6p Buo} tInq Ao p10 cas oe 4
(OADMO/Ng/S10JOH) E9JOW SBOJOH |OUOILON Ouy PUI} 9M OP e/a
(SOuIAOJd/UMO]) “uae ul SIOV SOO13} D Sl Sat
(Emqoquuiz JD9ID/alIDV seois

oUt 40 PENG alo eMqoqul7 jo SSUIOJOU PUD seoleE

"SOD/d SU} {NOQD ss_DID SUj I/O] "9D0I|d |OIDEds

a or eee Uo Uist SIse4 Se ANTIIAY IDEAL A

“SUINJ ILEUDYy PUD ‘UDBU_AU] JUANG
‘SJOOd DUDW ‘S8ADD IAOUYUIYD ‘S||D4 DUOJSIA ‘SOdOLOW ‘OJIZOUISNILA
SID SWOS “OMQNDQWIZ Ul sedoid jolIoeds JeUJO AUDMWW dJO did



