--- Page 1 ---
BA | college press

Ventures Primary
Family, Religion and
Moral Education

=
=
=)
2
fh
a
=)
O
S
i)
za

re

charge
t

k

al {eral

Feds ie

e

alle f
ha peop ead

- |
! a

” - i his <
zo de kave |
he 7 |

afe
Sat se i d
; |

a °

SL

Learner's Book


--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
Ventures Primary

Family, Religion and
Moral Education

Learner’s Book Grade 3)

BA\college press


--- Page 4 ---
Ventures Primary Family, Religion and Moral Education Learner’s Book Grade 3

© P. Maruba and N. Ndoda, 2017
© Design College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd, 2017

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyright Act, (Chapter 26:05), 2004.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable for criminal prosecution and
civil claims for damages.

First published 2017
Published by
College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd
P.O. Box 3041, Harare, Zimbabwe
Typeset in Century Gothic 12 pt
Artworks by: Watson Mukutirwa
Printed by
ISBN: 978-1-77900-653-0
Acknowledgements

The publishers and authors would like to acknowledge Gateway Primary School for the cover image.

The publishers have made every effort to trace the copyright holders. If they
have inadvertently overlooked any, they will be pleased to make the
necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.

It is illegal to photocopy any page of this book without written permission from the publishers.

Printed and bound by Impress Investments (Pty) Ltd


--- Page 5 ---
1 Ke) o) (oat I ea) | | eee seseeesenes sesecssesecee I
Unit 1 Concept Of FAMIY............. cs ssecccccecesesssssssscsreeccessessssssssseeeesssessesssssssesssessoeees 1
StrUCTUre Of Ch FOMIIY 0... cccccssssscccccessssesneceecessssneececeessseeseeesessseseeeseceeeeesees 2
FAMIlY NAMES ANA TOtEMS..........cssssssssssscccccceeeeeessssssscssssssssssscecoaeasseeseaseeses 8
FArNily TESOUICES ....scccccssstevecisssesescccticctssssevecaccseessvoonececesousoescnesssesenanenessesess 9
Unit 2 Family Gnd religion ...............ssscccccessssssccsssssscccesscsseccesssssseecersevssessessonsensenes 13
FOIMIIY UNITY ........ccceeeeccccccessssneeccceesssseeccccssecsseaceceessseseeeeesceesenseneesesessseetneeeees 13
Family life AN reliQiOn ............:ecccessseceeeesceeeesseecesesceeeesssaceeeesseeesesssessossseeeens 15
Unit 3 Family Gnd COMMUNRY oii ncsssisecssvssssssescsssssesenscasansssccrretscecsesessscsssssseesossess 19
Family roles in the COMMUNITY .............csecccessstecssssreecesseeeecessreceesstseeseseaeeees 19
Caring for the NECAY ..........seeecceccssssseccceeeecessseeeeesesceseeeseeeesssssneesessssssseeeeess 22
Unit 4 Social and Emotional IEAINiNG..............ccccccsscscccccsssscssssssssscssscssscssssssseeeees 28
Self-AWArENESS ANA SEIf-ESTCOM.........cscccccccssssssrcceccesessscceccesssssneececeessetaes 28
BENAVIOUL MANAGEMENN..........:ssssscssccecccccccececsssssssesessssssssssnnenaaseceeeeeeeeeeess 30
End Of term ONE ASSESSMEMN .........ccsssscssscncccrcccccecesesessscsssesestsssssceceeeeaeeeeeees 32
Topic 2 Religion.................... nansescsceesecescncsecceecceccecececocsceeeceaccessscsesssssesseeees 35
Unit 5 Concept Of reliGiONn............sssssscssccccsscssssserssrssssesssessssssescsersessesessesessesceeeseees 36
RELIGION IN TNE FAMILY ..........cceessstceccssseesssscceeceesessneeeeeesesesenaeeesessssesneeseeeeees 36
Unit 6 INGIGENOUS RELIGION ............:ssscccccsscsscssseerrscesseessessssesssesecesssesesssssesereesasooes 37
Origins Of INGIGENOUS REIIQION.........:ccssscccsssstceesssseccessstecsesssseesesssnesesessaes 37
Names of the SUPrEME BEIN.........ceceseccesssteeeessrccssssceeseesseeesesseessessesons 38
NYo[eik=10 ll ©) (0 [ot -\ eee 40
SONGS ANC GONCES .........ccssssssccreeeeensessseccessssssssesecssssssssssceessssssssensesessessees 4]
ReligioUs artefacts ANC AMTITES oe eeeseeneeccceeeessseeceeeteesesseceeeeeseesseeeeeeeeeens 42
SACO” CAYS: CHISI/IZIO 0... ccscccccccccccceeccessesseseseensssssecceseeeeeeeeeeseceeeseseseetseeaeaes 43
Unit 7 Christicnity ...............:scccccssssessssssseeeseesnecenessesceesssseaaesssesseesseeueancessersessseneneeees 46
POUNCED .. .ccsrsccsussovnsvessoosdedansonsseonpiitininad ieddboetiiinecciancecesegcadebadvensesesedsizsdédeosssseres 46
Names of the SUDrEME BEING...........cccecccccccecccceseceesseseceetensnnnenananeeeeeseeeeees 47
SYMDOIS AN SACFEC CYS ........cccccceeeeeseessssssesesennnenacaceccceeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeseneres 48
AMTIS .....csssesssssessssssssceccessececccecccescessesseseessensssnananacacccosceeeeeeeseccesceseettesseecsooooees 49
SYMDOL «ics. cccsssvisnnisnssnscovscevsieesageussivcevuvedeetvertesenctader eusteasdutsineesineis cactatccsveteens 50
PIACE Of WOMSHIP .........cccssssnsccccessssssccccessecssnseccesessscneaecescessneaaeeeesesesesseeeeeeeees 51
ThE HOLY DOOK o.oo... eeeesessscceceesssessceccccesssnneeeeeceeessnneeeeeeseseseaeeeeeeeseenaaeeesessoees 52
Unit 8 JUACISIN .....ccrcsssinevernsenstsnneaisusnnadencondsstsereatgniadsenstedeorsseaiebantaccsdtseestsessesivevinss 55
The FOUNCEL Of JUCOISN..........ccssscccccsssssseecceeesssssccccescessssseceeseesessenesesesooeeees 55
Names and titles of the SUDFEME BEING ........ eee eesetceeceteeeesesseeeseseeeeees 55
PIACE Of WOFSNIP ...........ssssessssssssssnnecsccccececessseeseseesssseesssnnanscecceeeseeeessesesseoooes 56
SACO AOYS .....cepsrsvsnvecntencsiaiaccsaceionchsdsisececsieestbnsescseonsrtutee teseceossnadsessovesoconess 57

SYMDOO wii civicsssssesssssensesevansnnctecacecssies siisuddendsedenives tasecosanseransesesatoesvecatssesseseneees 58


--- Page 6 ---
TNE NOLY DOOK ........cccccccccceccccceeceeceeeeeeeeeesssseesessceeeceeccceecesscesssseeeeeseaassseseeeeess 60
Unit 9 ISIN ..........scccecesccccceessescseceeccesceceseeessessecsceeucssesssesecesssscauaassscesesecesseeaesssseeseoes 63
FOUNCE? Of ISICON) 0.2... ec eccccceeeesessssssssssscseeeaeceececcceeeeseseseecessssnnnanseceeeeseceeeseeesens 63
Names and titles of the SUPrEME BEING ...........eceeeeessseeeseeeeereetetseeseeeees 64
PIACE Of WOFSNIP...........ccccssssecccessssseeececeessssnecceeescsenseeeeeeseesauseesessesenneeeseeses 65
NYo [et (10 [0 [0 \\ Seen 67
SYM OI ..ccccccessssssccescessssscceeceeesssseeeesscecssseeeesscessseeeeesceesseseeeeeceesesseeeeececesseeetess 67
MUSIIM CreSS CODEC... .cccsessssseccesssssnecececssssnncecceessssneseeeesssesnseeeeesseneneeeeesess 68
ENd Of term TWO ASSESSMENT .......:scccccsssssssecccessessnseecceseseseeseceesssesseseeeeeseesees 7
Topic 3 Morals Gnd VAIUGS............cceccseeesstteetssssesssssssessssssssessssseeseseeeeeees 74
Unit 10 Concept of morals ANd VaIUCS...............:sccsececccccetsesssessessceecceeeeaeesseceesenees 75
RIQNT CNC WIONG,.......scccessceeessecessecessncessseeessaeeeeseeeesseesssesecseesessaesesseeeeaseeeenenes 76
Attributes Of GOO MOSAIS...........ccccccessssesescesesssseeecesessseeeeeceesesseeeeeeesssessaeeees 77
Right tO DEIONG tO A LElIGION .........eeeeeeccsstcccesecesscceesseceseeeceeseeseeeeeseaseeeeneees 78
Respect for Other NUMAN DeEING.L...........ccssssceeessscccessteeessseeecesseeeeesseeereees 79
Rights ANd resSPONSIDILITI|S IN FAITNESS ...........:cccesstcceeestecesesnececeessesesesneeeeees 80
Unit 11 Conflict and conflict Management .....0........... cee eseecesescesesessetsceceesereeeees 85
COMNPICT AT NOME 1... cccsssssnseccccessssneecceesscsusececesecsuseeseeesessuueeseeseseseneeeeeees 85
CONPICT WITH FENS...........cseeeecccccssssnsecceessssseeeccesssssueeeceessessueecesesesesacaceeees 86
Conflict management at home and with friends .............scceseseeeeessreeees 87
Unit 12 National value system ............cccccceseeccccesssssneeccessssneceeseessensaeeecesessssaneeeeees 90
RESPECT u..ecccecscccsssseesresesresens saceesseessecesccesseessccessccsseeesecescenseeesceesseceaseesecnseees 90
Unit 13 Religion on technology and enterprise..............sssccccccccececsssssssscereceeeseeees 94
REIGIOUS APTEFACTS 0.0... ccecsssccseeseccsesseccesssnsccssseecessaseessseeecessnseeeeseeeeeeensees 94
REIIGION AN TECHNOlOGY...........ccsccccessecccesscccesssceecsssueeeseseeecessneeessseeeteeesnes 95
Topic 4 Religion Gnd NEA. ................ eesssececcececcesssssesececceceeesessesceeeeaenes 99
Unit 14 = REN QIN ANd ADUSEC....... eee ccsscesssseeeceeceesessesesseencoeeeeeseesesessneaeceeeeeeees 100
Religion, forms of sexual ADUSE ANC PErPeEtratOls...........ceseccceessreeeeeteees 100
Unit 15 = Religion ANd GENde lL... ee sessscecccccccececeesscseeececcccceeeeesseseceeceeceeeaaeeeeeeees 104
REGION ANA GENET FOI!S .............ccceessssssccceesssssecccceesssseeeccesesesseeeecsesessseeees 104
Unit 16 Religion ANd SEXUAIitY .................cccesssessncecececeesessstensrsecesecseesseeesesscaneecccesees 107
SOX IENTFICATION ..........cccccccsesssssscceesesssseeeecceeessseeesceesssseneeeceesessseeeeeeeesesansees 107
Unit 17 — Religion, HIV and AIDS 2.0.0... eccessseeccesssccececesssscceceessseceseecseceeeseesseeeees 110
Causes Of HIV ANd AIDS .........ccccesscesssecsssseessceesseeeessscesseeesssseessssesssneeesnsees 110
Religious attitudes towards HIV ANd AIDS ..........ceesscessecesseeeseeeesseeesseeens 111
AWAOreness ON HIV ANC AIDS ....... eee eesecccceeeessseceeeeeeeesseceeeessesseeeeeeeessesteeeeeees 112
Unit 18 Healthy living................csessccccccccssssssssceeceesceeseescssssaneeceeseeteessssaneeeeesereeeseesoe 115
PErsOndl NYGICNE............cescceccessssssseccecessssseeececesssneeeeceeesseneeeeeeeseesaseseeeeeeees 115
HEAITNY NADITS.......... ec ecceeesssssssssssseseseececececccececeeeecessessscceeceeseeeeseceeeeeseeeeeees 116
Healthy Gating NDIts «0.00... eeeesscecsssnsceceesseeessseeeesesateeeesseeeesseteeeesseeeeeses 117

End of term three ASSESSMENT...........ccccccsessscscccccessssscccccescssssssccsssseeesssseseees 120


--- Page 7 ---
Introduction

A family is made up of a group of people who are connected to each other
through birth, marriage or adoption. Families believe in different things. This makes
them part of different religions. These religions impact on family unity and how
they do things. A group of families living in one area, place or region make up
a community. The community plays a big role in caring for and supporting the
needy.


--- Page 8 ---
Unit 1 Concept of family

Objectives

y the end of the unit, you should be able to:
describe the structure of families
compare and contrast the structure of families
identify names and family members
state family totems
identify family possessions.

Background

Our families are different. Let us talk about our families. Do you know where your
family name came from?

g nuclear totem surname

siblings indigenous people

1A. Structure of a family

There are different family structures in each community. The structure of a family
is how it is arranged. For example, a family may have one husband, one wife and
their children. A different structure can have one husband, five wives and their
children.

Activity 1

Bring pictures of your family members. Take turns to present them in class

while talking about your family.
How many different types of families can you identify from the photographs
presented?



--- Page 9 ---
a) Nuclear family

A nuclear family is made up of parents and their children. Children born in a
nuclear family are siblings. Nuclear families use the same surname which is usually
that of the father. A surname is a name common to all members of a family.
Nuclear families also share everything they own, their home, food and property.
In Indigenous Religion, a polygamous family is considered a nuclear family. The
children are from the same father and they share the same surname.

Activity 2

1. In groups, talk about the characteristics of a nuclear family.
2. Cut and paste pictures of nuclear families onto a chart.

Exercise 1

. Anuclear family is made up of ________annd their

. Children in the nuclear family are known as ——____..

. Whose family name do nuclear families usually use as their surname?
. In Indigenous Religion, a ________ is considered a nuclear family.



--- Page 10 ---
Monogamous family

My name is Caroline. | am in Grade Three. | stay in Chiredzi town with my mother
and father. | have two brothers, Raymond and Kudzai. My sister’s name is Tawana.
Our family is a monogamous family. My father has one wife. Our surname is Ndoda.
Raymond is the eldest and Kudzai is the youngest.

Activity 3

1. In groups, talk about monogamous families.
2. List things that monogamous families share.

Exercise 2
Where does Caroline live?

How many siblings does Caroline have?

In nuclear families, children use one surname. [True/False]
In a monogamous family there is wife.

How many people are there in Caroline's family?



--- Page 11 ---
Polygamous family

In a village in Binga, there was a man called Mr Mulimi. Mr Mulimi had five wives.
Each wife stayed with her children. Children born in this family called each of their
father's wives ‘mother’. They grew their own food and everybody worked in the
fields. Children took meals in their mothers’ huts. The father ate from all the huts.
Children were given tasks to do for the family like fetching water and firewood,
looking after animals and babies. The family prayed together every day before
going to sleep.

Activity 4

In groups of 5, act out a polygamous family.

Talk about the differences and similarities between a monogamous family
and a polygamous family.
Cut and paste pictures of different types of families onto a chart.



--- Page 12 ---
Exercise 3

How many wives did Mr Mulimi have?

List three tasks that were given to children.

In the Mulimi family, they their own food.
What did the family do before going to bed?
Where did the children take their meals?

b) Single parent family

The setup of each family differs with circumstances. There are families that have
a single parent taking care of children. The father or mother would have lost a
partner through death or divorce. The remaining parent takes care of the family.
When parents divorce, children sometimes visit the parent they do not stay with.

Activity 5

1. In groups, discuss the kind of family you come from.
2. List down good things you have done for your family.



--- Page 13 ---
Exercise 4

. A father or mother can lose a partner through divorce or .

. When parents divorce, children can stay with either the mother or

. Parents of their families.

. Amancan be a single parent. [True/False]

. When parents divorce, children sometimes visit the parent they do not stay
with. [True/False]

A child-headed family is a family whereby the main care giver is a minor under the
age of 18. This could be due to neglect, death of parents or parents working in the
diaspora (outside the country). The parents might also be physically or mentally
challenged.


--- Page 14 ---
Activity 6

1. Research on the child-headed families in your community.
2. Find the reasons for the existence of these families.

1B. Family names and totems

Names

The family name is the one which you share with other members of your family.
This is your surname. Family names are either the father or the mother's name. It
is common in Zimbabwe for the surname to come from the father's side. Married
women often also use the husband's surname.

Some family names come from totems. A totem is an animal, part of the body or
an object that a particular group of people uses to represent their family. Most of
the Zimbabwean indigenous people have totems. Indigenous people are people
who originate in a particular place or region. People’s totems are sacred to them.
They do not eat meat from the animal or part of the body of their totem. It is
believed that if you eat meat of your totem you will either lose teeth or suffer some
misfortune. Different families can share the same totem. The pictures above show
some of the totems common in Zimbabwe.

Totems are used as a form of family identity. People of the same totem are like
brothers and sisters. They have a sense of being related. This means one cannot
marry anyone of the same totem. Marriage between people of the same totem
is regarded as taboo and it may anger the ancestral spirits. Once the ancestral
spirits are angry, they may punish people of the area or of the totem. They do this
by not sending rains or causing some suffering of some sort.


--- Page 15 ---
Activity 7

1. In groups, write the totems of each member.
2. Find the most common totem in your class.
3. Draw an animal or body part of a totem you know.

Exercise 5

. What is your surname?
2. Totems are names we get from and
. Who else can share the same totem?
. Marriage between people of the same totem is accepted by the ancestors.
[True/False]
. What happens if you eat the meat or body part of your totem?

1C. Family resources

Family in the communal area

My name is Ryan. | stay in Chiweshe communal area with my grandparents,
Ambuya Chirenje and Sekuru Chirenje. The homestead is on a very large piece of
land. There are three separate houses. Ambuya Chirenje owns a very big round
kitchen that is grass thatched. At the edge of the homestead is a cattle kraal.
Grandfather has a herd of 14 cattle. The cattle are used to plough and give us
milk. The rest of the land is used to grow crops for food and sale.

,
ae

i

™



--- Page 16 ---
Activity 8

1. Draw a round thatched kitchen.
2. Make a model cow using clay.

Exercise 6

. Where does Ryan live?

. How many houses are at Ryan's homestead?

. Name two things that they use cattle for.

. Grandfather has cattle.

. Describe your home and the resources you have.

Family in the urban area

wy

Tavonga is a nine year old girl. She stays in Bindura. Her mother, Mrs Vengesayi,
works at a bank. Tavonga’s family owns a very big house and they have one big
car. The house is builf on a large stand. It has four bedrooms, a kitchen, a pantry,
a big lounge, a dining room and an attached garage. The kitchen has nice fitted
cupboards and a four plate stove. In the evening the family sits on their beautiful

sofas to watch television.


--- Page 17 ---
Activity 9

1. Cut and paste pictures of beautiful houses.
2. Use card board to model a modern house.

Exercise 7

. List two resources from Tavonga's family.

. Where does Tavonga stay?

. How many rooms does the house have?

. Mrs Vengesayi works in a

. What does Tavonga's family do i in the evening?

Summary

e Everyone belongs to a family.

e There are different family structures namely the nuclear, monogamous,
polygamous, single parent and child headed families.

e Anuclear family is made up of father, mother and children.

¢ Totems are used as a form of identity.

e Every family has some resources.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

What is a family?

A. A group of people who are connected to each other through birth,
marriage or adoption.

B. Children only.

C. A group of people who know each other.

D. The community.

Your parents’ parents are called

A. uncles B. cousins

C. grandparents D. aunties

If a man has many wives, we call this a family.

A. nuclear B. polygamous

C. child headed D. monogamous

Besides names, people are also known by their

A. hair B. crops

C. totems D. eyes

People do not eat of their totems.

A. meat B. totems

C. names D. people



--- Page 18 ---
Marriage of people of the same totem is
A. taboo B. allowed
C. common D. laughed at
Married women often use their surname.
A. husband's . mother’s
C. aunt's . uncle's
We should one another.
A. kill . hate
Cc. love . ignore
Marriage brings together
A. _ friends . two families
C. spirit mediums . children

10. Parents for us.
A. provide . murder
Cc. lie . cheat

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
A family is .
What is the difference between polygamous and monogamous families?
A single parent would a partner.
What is a totem?
Marriage between people of the same totem is
[1 5marks]

Glossary

Challenged when someone is unable or has difficulty in doing
something

Circumstances what happens because of an event.

Minor someone or a person not of legal age.

Neglect fail to care for.

Taboo something that is not socially acceptable.



--- Page 19 ---
Unit 2 Family and religion

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. describe family unity
2. explain family practices in relation to religion.

Background

Family members belong to different religions. There is unity and everyone respects
each other's religion. The coming together of a man and a woman to form a
family is called marriage.

| ( ) Key words

religion family unity

2A. Family Unity

Family unity is maintaining oneness and supporting each other as a group of
related people. Unity in families can be seen during ceremonies and when one
needs help. In Indigenous Religion, families helo each other during celebrations
like birthdays, coming of age and weddings. Religion is the belief of the existence
and worship of a God or Gods. During funerals, in Indigenous Religion, families
help with labour, money, food and comforting each other.

In Islam, family is very important. The Islamic religion believes that people have
to be mindful of their relatives, even those who are not part of their religion. The
Iskamic holy book instructs Muslims to be respectful, merciful and caring towards
parents and relatives. The Islamic holy book is the Koran. To maintain family unity,
Muslims believe in regular visits to relatives and assisting them when there is need.

Christians believe that forgiveness and love maintain family unity. The Christian
Bible instructs Christians to love and forgive, to care for their family and relatives. It
also tells them that where there is unity, God commands a blessing. Christians also
believe that a family that prays together stays together. Christianity says that love
is important and helps maintain unity. Families should spend time together to build

and maintain a special bond.


--- Page 20 ---
The Nyamusoro family

Tsitsi Nyamusoro stays in Mzilikazi, Bulawayo, with her parents. She is in Grade Three.
Her grandparents are in Gwanda and her other relatives are all over Zimbabwe.
The family is very big but they all know and love each other. Family members write
letters or telephone each other. Once every year they meet in Gwanda for a
family gathering. Tsitsi likes these gatherings because she will play with her cousins
and see new babies in the family. The grandparents slaughter a cow and the rest
bring food. Dances and storytelling are done at every gathering.

Activity 1
1.

In groups, list members of your extended family. Extended family are members
from your parents blood families.
2. Make a poem for your family.

Exercise 1

. Tsitsi stays in .

. Where do the grandparents live?

. How does Tsitsi’s family show love?

. Unity in families can be seen during
. Who is your cousin?



--- Page 21 ---
2B. Family life and religion

Family life is influenced by the religion a family follows. Different religions have
different practices they follow. Their beliefs in handling some things in life differ. For
example, how they treat birth, puberty, marriage, good harvest and death.

a) Birth

Religions celebrate the birth of a new born in different ways. Christians dedicate
a new born baby to God. Some churches hold special services for the baptism
of new born babies that are attended by friends and family. In Islam, a special
prayer is whispered into the right ear of the child by the father. After seven days a
sheep is sacrificed and the baby's hair is shaved. This is done to show that the child
is a servant of Allah. Muslim baby boys are circumcised when they are seven days
old. In Judaism, a male child is circumcised when he is eight days old. Children are
given names at the first gathering. In Indigenous Religion, when a child is born, the
first thing they do is ululation. This is a sign of welcoming the baby and celebrating
with the parents. In some cultures, it is done by close relatives and friends. The
child has to stay indoors for at least a week. The umbilical code, in some cultures,
is buried at the father’s place of origin. After a month or two, a ceremony is held
to welcome the child. At this time, especially in the Ndebele culture, everyone is
then allowed to see the baby.

b) Coming of age

Coming of age is celebrated in different ways in different religions. Celebrations
of boys and girls differ. For boys, in Indigenous Religion, the most common is the
circumcision initiation ceremony. Jews have a Bar Mitzvah (for boys) and a Bat
Mitzvah (for girls).The bar or bat mitzvah ceremony is usually held after a boy's
thirteenth and a girl's twelfth birthday. In Islam, girls when going through puberty
start to wear hijab (which means barrier or screen in Arabic).

c) Marriage

Families have different religious practices whenit comes to marriage. In the Christian
religion, the man pays a bride price in the form of cattle and money. After this is
done, a wedding ceremony is held at the family’s church to join the two before
God, family and friends. Islamic marriages are usually arranged. The husband has
to agree on an amount of money to be given to the wife’s family before marriage.
This is called the Mahr. It is then given to the wife to spend on anything she wants.
In Indigenous Religion, the man pays a certain amount of money and cattle as
the bride price (roora/lobola). The aunts of the girl prepare kitchen utensils for
the bride. The aunts and sisters accompany the bride to the husband's home.
Whereas among some Jews it is customary for the wedding couple to fast on their
wedding day. Marriage under Jewish law is a private agreement between a man
and a woman, it does not require the presence of a rabbi or any other religious

official.


--- Page 22 ---
d) Death

In some Christian families, there is a gathering of people to comfort the bereaved
and provide labour. The Pastor or Reverend reads the bible and prays for the
family. In some cultures within Indigenous Religion, if a married woman dies,
the husband and his family give money to her family. The body of the departed
lies in the house for one night before burial. Family and friends spend the whole
night singing and dancing in celebration of the life of the departed. In Judaism,
families meet to mourn the dead. They do so to show respect and comfort the
bereaved.

Activity 2

Compare family practices between Christianity and Islam. Create a table of the
differences and similarities between the two religions.

Exercise

Family life is influenced by the a family follows.

Christians dedicate a new born baby to

Among some Jews, it is customary for the wedding couple to on their
wedding day.

In the Christian religion, the man pays the in the form of cattle and
money.

What is lobola/roora?

Project 1A

Research about family practises in different religions. In groups of 4, create
a portfolio of family practices and keep it in the Family, Religion and Moral
Education corner.

Summary

Family unity is maintaining oneness

During ceremonies, families support each other.

Families should spend time together to build and maintain a special bond.
Christians dedicate new born babies to God.

Muslim babies are shaved when they are seven years old.

All families in different religions meet to mourn the dead.


--- Page 23 ---
End of Unit Assessment

Christians believe and maintain family unity.
A. hurt and bad luck B. pain and fear

C. sickness and labour D. love and forgiveness
Where there is unity, commands a blessing.

A. parents B. _ sisters

C. God D. pastors

After seven day a Muslim baby’s hair is

A. shaved B. combed

C. dyed D. plaited

During ceremonies, families each other.

A. support B. shun

C. runaway from D. avoid

Families should spend time together to build and a special bond.
A. curve B. make

C. maintain D. destroy

Family life is influenced by the a family follows.

A. road B. religion

C. peace D. life

The Islamic holy book instructs Muslims to be and
parents and relatives.

A. disrespectful and careless B. rude and caring

C. respectful and careless D. merciful and caring
In Indigenous Religion, families help each other during

A. celebrations B. sleeping

Cc. eating D. playing

In Indigenous Religion, when a child is born, the first thing they do is
A. making noise B. jumping

C.  ululation D. crying

Unity in families can be seen during and when one needs help.
A. swallowing B. religion

C. killing D. ceremonies

Structured questions

The body of the departed lies in the for one night before burial.
Some Christian churches new born babies.
Jewish babies are given names at the first
What influences family practices?
Girls in Islam, when going through puberty, start to wear
[15 marks]



--- Page 24 ---
Glossary

Christians
Muslims
Mourn

Bar Mitzvah
Bat Mitsvah

followers of Jesus Christ.
followers of the Islamic religion. Their name for God is Allah.

to feel or show sorrow for the death of someone.
Jewish ceremony for boys when they turn thirteen.
Jewish ceremony for girls when they turn twelve.



--- Page 25 ---
Family and community

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. identify family chores
explain the need to share tasks
list family roles in the community
identify the needy in the community
state how communities help the needy
state how religions help the needy.

Background

We all belong to a social unit which is bigger than a family. This unit is made up of
different families and we call it a community.

pep Key words
J role bereaved community chores

3A. Family roles in the community

Families have roles they play within themselves. They have chores that are done
by all members of the family. Everyone has a role to play in doing duties at home.
However, families also have roles they play in their community. A community is a
group of families living in a particular area. There are some people from different
families who take leadership roles in the community, forexample; chiefs, councillors,
members of parliament and mayors. These people are supported by their families
to help the community during good and bad times. Families in a community host
different celebrations and ceremonies. In all these different times, other families in
the community support them with food, labour, transport, firewood and money.
When there is death in a family, the community collects money to help. The money
has different names, some call it ‘chema’ and others ‘masingcwabane’. In the
different occasions, women and girls help with cooking whilst men and boys get

firewood and set up tents.



--- Page 26 ---
Activity 1

1. In groups, discuss the roles that families play in the community.
2. Draw people in a community project of your choice.

a) Family chores

Look at the pictures below.

Family members share chores at home. Chores are routine tasks, especially
household ones. There are no chores that are said to be done specifically by
women or men. Both girls and boys can do the same chores. Men and women
can also do the same chores. Family chores involve cleaning the house, washing
clothes, cleaning plates, cooking, watering the garden and flowers and sweeping
the yard. There are a number of chores that can be done in a family. People in
families help each other so as to make sure that all is done on time and in the right
way.

Activity 2

1. In groups, list the chores you do at home.
2. Cut and paste pictures of children doing chores at home.
3. Look at the pictures above. Discuss what is happening in each picture.

Exercise 1

. Family members chores at home.

. In picture B, what is father doing?

. Give two types of work mother does at home.
. What work does father do at home?

. Name two chores, that you do at home.



--- Page 27 ---
b) Family roles in the community

=| $|

ae

The Machida family stayed in a village in Gokwe. The village had a lot of families.
One day their neighbours were celebrating their son’s wedding. Early in the
morning Mr Machida and his sons, Fergus and Tafadzwa, went to fetch water for
the function. The girls, Tanaka, Lorraine and Clara helped to clean the yard and
prepare fire places. Mrs Machida cooked the food with other village ladies. Other
girls from the village assisted with cleaning plates. The whole family helped with
the preparations and later on joined in the celebration. Families in this village also
help each other on many other occasions. At funerals they gather to comfort the
bereaved. To be bereaved is when one suffers from the death of a loved one. The
families also help the vulnerable members of the community like orphans and the
elderly.

Activity 3

1. In groups, list celebrations that can be for the whole community.



--- Page 28 ---
2. Word search

Find these words:
FAMILY
CLARA
DEATH
ROLES
COMMUNITY
PLATES
WATER

Exercise 2

. What was being celebrated?

. Which family is mentioned?

. In your area, how does your family help neighbours?
. Who was helping to cook?

. What other occasions do families help each other?

3B. Caring for the needy

Communities and religions can help the needy in many ways. They can identify
and keep records of the needy in their societies. People who want to help can do
so through churches, clinics, schools and community heads. They can also collect
things from the community members as well as the church members and give to
the needy according to the records they keep. Christians believe that it is more
blessed to give than to receive.



--- Page 29 ---
The needy in our communities are the people who lack some of the basic
necessities such as food and shelter. These include:

e orphans and vulnerable children

° the aged

° the handicapped.

a) Orphans and vulnerable children

An orphan is a child whose parents are dead. Vulnerable children are those that
lack primary care and protection. Orphans and vulnerable children need help
from the society. There are orphanages and homes for orphans and vulnerable
children. Communities put together donations in cash and kind for these children.
Examples of homes for children are Matthew Rusike in Harare, Emthunzi WeThemba
and Thembiso children's home in Bulawayo. In some communities, there are
fields set aside for helping the needy (zunde ramambo/isiphala senkosi). After
harvesting, the food is donated amongst the needy in the community.


--- Page 30 ---
b) The aged

Within our communities we have people who are old. Most of them can no longer
work for themselves to cover basic needs. They depend on others for food, shelter
and clothing. It is the duty of the community to help them. The community can
help them by making sure that they have food and shelfer. Communities also have
homes for the old to make sure they are taken care of. Examples are Entembeni
Old People’s Home in Bulawayo, Greendale Cottages in Harare, Batanai in Gweru
and Rugare in Kwekwe.

c) The handicapped

The handicapped are people with physical and mental challenges. These people
are limited in one or more of life's activities. The Community can help them by
providing basic needs. They can also be provided with raw materials to make
products they can sell and make a living. This group can also be taught skills such
as basketry, capenitry and welding. The things they make can be sold and the
money can be used to buy food and clothes for them. We can also provide them
with things they use, for example, a white stick for the blind or wheelchairs and
crutches for those who cannot walk.


--- Page 31 ---
There are different organisations that assist the people in this group. Schools
like King George IV Centre in Bulawayo have children with different disabilities.
The community also donates different things to the school. Another example
of organisations that help the handicapped is the Jairos Jiri Association. This
association provides educational services to people with disabilities. They also
create awareness to the communities about the things the disabled can do. This is
to make sure that the disabled are treated as equal to any other person and can
be employed like any other person.

+

ee er N

. aes eer

oy

anil

How religions help the needy

All religions believe in helping the needy. In Christianity, Christians put together
donations for the needy in their communities and congregations. These can be
food, clothes, money and other basic needs. They also visit the homes of the
needy to show them love, support and care. Islam also believes in helping the
needy. Their holy book tells them to do good and give food out of love for the
needy. In Judaism, helping the poor and the needy is a duty. Different religions
help the needy in any way they can, be it love, support or money and clothes.


--- Page 32 ---
Activity 4

1. Collect gifts for the needy children in your community. You may ask your
teacher for help.
2. List the organisations that help the needy in your community.

Exercise 3

. The needy in the community are

. How do communities help the needy?

. Aperson who has no parents is called an
. The aged are the people who are

. How do religions help the needy?

Project 1C

Write letters to the head of the school, religions in the community and the
community leaders asking for permission to collect things to help the needy.
Choose a committee that will issue out the letters and make sure that you get
response to the letters.

Summary

e Every family is part of a community.

e Families have roles to play in the community.

e The needy people are orphans and vulnerable children, the aged and the
physically and mentally challenged.

° It is the duty of the community to help the needy.

° All religions believe in helping the needy.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Families make up a
A. big family B. community
C. household D. family

All families have to play in the community.
A. nothing B. funerals

C. roles D. celebrations
We should our neighbours.

A. hate B. love

C.. kill D. _ trust



--- Page 33 ---
Blind people use a white
A. horn B. cloth
C. stick D. hat

can be offered to the needy in place of money.
A. Services B. Beatings
C. Nothing D. Stones
It is more to give than to receive.
A. gifted B. lovable
C. blessed D. easy

is an old people's home in Bulawayo.
A. Batanai B. Rugare
C. Greendale Cottage D. Entembeni
A child whose parents are dead is called an
A. orphan B. aged
C. vulnerable D. physically challenged
All religions believe in the needy.
A. ignoring B. helping
C. looking at D. running from

10. At funerals people gather to the bereaved.

A. _ listen B. laugh at
C. obey D. comfort

Structured questions

Answer all the questions below
1. Who are the handicapped?
2. The needy are

i) _

iii) .
3. Name two roles families play in the community.
4. Churches believe it is more blessed to give than to
5. List three organisations that help the needy.

[15 marks]

Glossary

Carpentry activity of making things in wood.

Function work in a proper or certain way.

Vulnerable capable of being attacked or harmed, either
physically or emotionally.



--- Page 34 ---
Unit 4 Social and emotional learning

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:

1. explain self-awareness and self-esteem

2. identify the impact of one’s actions on others

3. explain the influence of one’s actions in other people's lives.

Background

As we grow older, the body changes. The body is special no one should touch it
in a bad way. Protect the body and protect yourself from abuse.

pep Key words
A
G emotion intellect self-awareness

4A. Self-awareness and self-esteem

a) Myself



--- Page 35 ---
We all need to understand ourselves. We need to know about our strengths,
weaknesses, thoughts and beliefs. Understanding what make us happy and sad
will help us to protect ourselves from the things that makes us sad. We also need
to understand our bodies and the importance of our body parts. Self-awareness is
knowing about yourself. When you know yourself you can be able to make good
decisions.

1. In pairs, take turns to stand before the class identifying body parts on each

other.
2. Name the uses of different body parts.

b) Emotion

An emotion is a strong feeling for or about something. Examples of emotions are
fear, sadness, joy and surprise. Emotions can change depending on what happens
around us, to us or inside us. The more self-awareness we have, the more we are
able to control our emotions. When you are aware of who you are and what you
can do and how you look, you are able to control your emotions.

c) Intellect

Intellect is being able to think and understand certain things. People should be
able to tell how others are feeling or how some things will affect their self-esteem.
For example, can you tell if someone is angry or afraid?

d) Self-esteem

Ngoni was poor at athletics. Every year when first term came he would dislike going
to school because all his classmates would make fun of him when he came last.
Ngoni started to feel sad about himself. He wished he could run fast like Themba.
One day his teacher asked him to join the music class. Ngoni did not want to
join because he feared that he could not do anything good. He did not have
confidence to try. His teacher kept on encouraging him. Ngoni decided to try it
out. He played different instruments but he found he enjoyed playing the guitar.
The music teacher complimented him for his natural talent. This year the music
club was asked fo play at the inter-house competition. Ngoni played so well that
everyone in his class was so proud of him.

Exercise 1

Who was poor at athletics?

Emotions can change depending on what happens
We need to try out new things.

Give two examples of emotions.

ls it good to make fun of others?



--- Page 36 ---
4B. Behaviour management

Thando belongs to a group of boys who sell food and drinks at the bus terminus.
The boys have discovered that it is easy to steal small things from passengers when
they get on the bus or as the bus drives away. They grab these things as the bus
gathers soeed and run away. Thando could see that his friends were making
money. One day he joined them and took home a lot of money. After a week the
boys were trapped by the police and got arrested.

Activity 2

1. In groups, discuss if it is a good thing to send children to sell things.
2. In groups, dramatise Thando and his friends.

Exercise 2

. Who belonged to a group?

. What job did Thando and his friends do?

. How did Thando and his friends steal from people?
. Is stealing a good thing?

. The boys were arrested by the



--- Page 37 ---
Summary

Self awareness is knowing about your body parts and their importance.
One has to behave well to be accepted in the community.
The more self-awareness we have, the more we are able to control our

. You need confidence to

feelings. -

End of unit assessment Test

A good child knows what is right or
A. wrong B.
C. correct D.
Self-awareness is knowing about
A. friends B.
C. parents D.
We use our eyes to
A. hear B.
C. see D.
Without our legs we cannot
A. talk
C. walk

is an emotion.
A. Anger
C. Dancing
Which habit is wrong?
A. helping
C. talking
A person who has bad behaviour can
A. lie B.
C. change D.
A good friend is the one that
A. likes you when you do bad things
B. does bad things with you. C.
D. does nothing.
Self-awareness helps you make good
A. house B.
C. boy D.

A. leave
C. listen

right
rightful

neighbours
ourselves

touch
smell

taste
see

Running
Stealing

stealing
eating
and have good behaviour.
grow
run

respects you.

decisions
girl

out new things.



--- Page 38 ---
Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

When you do good things people you.

Emotions can change depending on what happens

We use our arms to and

Stealing is a thing.

Self-esteem is the confidence to out new things. [15 marks]

Glossary

Awareness having knowledge

Confidence feeling that one can have faith in someone.

End of term one assessment

Multiple choice questions

Answer all questions below.

1.

Members of a family should one another.

A. hate B. love

C. fight D. kill

A family is made up of .

A. mother, father and children B. father and mother
C. children only D. grandparents
Children who lost both parents are

A. lame B. orphans

C. beggars D. foster

When people have differences they

A. sleep B. eat

C. correct each other D. sing

Marriage between people of the same totem is

A. taboo B. allowed

C. laughed at D. common

A Zimbabwean association for helping the disabled is
A. Jairos Jiri Association B. Entembeni

C. Thembiso D. Batanai
Children should their parents.

A. obey B. lie to

C. disrepect D. hide from



--- Page 39 ---
All religions believe in the needy.
A. shunning B. ignoring
C. helping D. beating
A son born from your uncle is your
A. niece B. uncle
C. nephew D. cousin
What do you call your mother's sister?
A. aunt B. sister
C. mother D. in-law
When a man has several wives, it’s called
A. monogamy B. nucleus
C. polygamy D. child -nheaded
When a child takes care of brothers and sisters, it is called a family.
A. anorphan B. child-headed
C. polygamy D. street
is when one parent takes care of children.
A. Family B. Foster
C. Single- parent family D. Grand parent
parents adopt children who are orphans.
A. Crazy B. Foster
C. Child-headed D. Church
Totems get their names from
A. fathers and mothers B. animals only
C. animals, objects and body parts D. families
At funerals, families gather to the bereaved.
A. laugh at B. comfort
C. stare at D. join
Which religion believes in ululating when a child is born?
A. Christianity B. Judaism
C. Indigenous Religion D. Islam
A child who lost his/her parents is called
A. anorphan B. aloner
C. disabled D. street kid
is knowing about yourself.
A. Esteem B. Anger
C. Self-awareness D. Fear
When do children have step-parents?
A. When the remaining parent remarries.
B. Whenone parent dies.
C. When parents divorce.
D. When both parents are together.
In Indigenous Religion a is considered a nuclear family.
A. polygamous family B. rich family
C. hateful family D. helpless family



--- Page 40 ---
What is a nuclear family?

A. Father and mother only. B. Father, mother and their children only.
C. Children only D. children and their cousins

In Indigenous Religion, a family is

A. _ is father, mother and children only

B. all father’s brothers, sisters and their children including grandparents
C. father's and mother’s families

D. one’s brothers and sisters only

Family life is influenced by the a family follows.

A. road B. religion

C. peace D. life

At funerals, people gather to the bereaved

A. obey B. laugh at

C. comfort D. listen to

Structured questions

Answer question one and any other two questions
Read the passage and answer questions that follow.

Violet stays in Gokwe. She is in Grade Three. Her school is Nembudziya Primary.
One Monday morning when she was going to school she saw Felistas sitting beside
the road crying. Felistas had hurt her foot on broken glass. She had a big cut. Other
pupils passed Felistas but Violet helped her. She put sand on the wound to stop it
bleeding. She helped Felistas back home. That day Violet was late for school.

1. Who had her foot cut by glass?
helped Felistas.
Why was Violet late for school?
We should learn to _____._ one another.
How do Christians help the needy?
The aged are people who are :
Members of your family should one another.
is a strong feeling about something.
All religions believe in the needy.
The body is no one should touch it in a bad way.
Christians believe marriage is made by
Name three groups of needy people.
Christians believe that a family that together stays together.

eansggnT90000

[40 marks]



--- Page 41 ---
Religion

Introduction

Religion is the belief in the existence and worship of god. People all over the world
belong to different religions. In Zimbabwe there are religions such as Indigenous
Religion, Christianity, Judaism and Islam. All these religions believe in the existence
of a god.


--- Page 42 ---
Unit 5 Concept of religion

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. identify religions in different families.

Background

Which religion does your family belong to? Is it the same as that of your neighbours?
Just as we come from different families, we may also belong to different religions.
Families are united by the religious beliefs they have.

Key words

respect elders

Religion in the family

Our families belong to the following religions:

¢ Indigenous Religion
¢ Christianity

¢ Judaism

¢ Islam

Religion is very important as it unites families and forms our daily lives. All religions
value family unity and respect for one another. Children respect their parents.
Parents love their children and take care of them. Fathers and mothers love each
other and together they take care of their families. Family members worship
together. Every member of the family has a role to play for the good of the family.

Activity

In groups:

1. Go and find out information about Indigenous Religion, Christianity, Judaism
and Islam. Ask your parents and elders in your community.

2. Find pictures of people who belong to the different religions.

3. Each group will present to the class what they found.



--- Page 43 ---
Unit 6 Indigenous Religion

Objectives

Py the end of the unit, you should be able to:
describe the origins of Indigenous Religion
state names of the Supreme being and find the meanings of these names
identify and compare sacred places in Indigenous Religion
identify and sing songs related to ceremonies and festivals
name and describe religious artefacts and attire in Indigenous Religion
name the symbols used in Indigenous Religion and show their significance
state sacred days in Indigenous Religion.

Background

This religion began in Africa a long time ago. The beliefs and ways of worship differ
from one ethnic group to another.

ep Key words
C4 vadzimu amadlozi generation

sacred chisi/izilo

6A. Origins

Indigenous Religion started when people in Africa started to live in groups as
societies. From the beginning, people believed that there was a God who was
a supernatural being. This God created everything and had to be worshipped.
As time went on people developed various ways and ceremonies of worshipping
God. Indigenous Religion does not have a Holy Book like the other religions. All
practices and values were handed down from generation to generation through
word of mouth. A generation refers to people who are born and live during the
same time. Young people are taught about the practices of the religion by the
elders.


--- Page 44 ---
Activity 1

1. Find out from your elders some practices in Indigenous Religion.
2. Present what you have learnt to the class.

6B. Names of the Supreme Being

Indigenous Religion believes in the Supreme Being. The Supreme Being is called
God. God has been known in Indigenous Religion by many names. Indigenous
Religion is fully aware that God created everything that we see. It also believes
that God has a living place. Different societies have different names for God. The
names of God refer to what the people believe he has done or what he does for
them.



--- Page 45 ---
Meanings

Tonga

Chiuta wakuChanga God of heavens

Leza God the nurturer/ ruler of creation
Mulungu One who creates/moulds

Venda

Mudzimu - God

Xhosa

Qamatha - The great one

Shona

Musikavanhu God the creator
Mwari God

Nyadenga God of heavens

Ndebele

UNkulukulu Almighty God
Somandlia All powerful God
Umlimu God

Activity 2
1. In groups, compile a list of indigenous names by which God is called.
2. Find other names given to God by the different Zimbabwean languages.

Exercise 1

. Whois the Supreme Being?
A. People B. Ancestral spirits C. God
According to Indigenous Religion created everything.
A. God B. Elder people C. noone
Which Shona name for God shows that he created people?
A. Nyadenga B. Musikavanhu C. Mwari
How do young people learn about Indigenous Religion?
A. By reading the holy book.
B. By listening to their elders. C. They learn on their own
Write down a list of the names of God in Venda, Shona and Ndebele.



--- Page 46 ---
6C. Sacred places

Se Phe

Home alter (Chikuva/Emsamo)

A sacred place is a holy place which is respected. It is used for performing religious
ceremonies. In Indigenous Religion a number of sacred places are used for
worship. In the traditional round kitchen hut there is a special place called home
alter (chikuva/emsamo). Birth, marriage and death rituals within the home are
conducted on this home alter.

Trees such as muhacha are sacred trees and most community rituals are carried
out under such trees. In some places a whole forest can be sacred. People are not
allowed to say bad things about the sacred places as misfortune may befall them.
Some hills, mountains and caves are also regarded as sacred. Examples are
Matopos, Nyangani, Chishawasha Hills and caves and Chinhoyi caves. Pools
along some rivers are also sacred. These pools are often associated with mermaids,
creatures which are believed to be half human and half fish. These creatures are
also known as water spirits. People are not allowed to make dirty these sacred
places.

Well known sacred places such as Njelele Shrine in Matobo Hills, are used for rain
making ceremonies.

Activity 3

1. Research on the scared places in your locality.
2. Visit a scared place.



--- Page 47 ---
Exercise 2

A sacred place is used for ___..
A. rest B. playing games C. worship

List four different sacred places.

Which creature is known as a water spirit?
Why do people go to the Njelele shrine?
In homes, where are rituals usually done?

6D. Songs and dances

Songs and dance are performed during ritual ceremonies. Each ceremony has
songs and dances specific to it. There are songs and dances to celebrate birth,
marriage and death. Traditional dancers wear their dancing attire and they play
different musical instruments such as african drums, shakers and mbira. In these
ceremonies, songs and dances are meant to appease ancestral spirits known as
vadzimu/amadlozi.

Dance Ceremony/festival |

Mbira Bira/umthethelo to invite ancestors to speak to the people
Dinhe
Celebrations, funerals, recreational competitions

Muchongoyo/|_ In preparation for war and after war
Mushongoyo



--- Page 48 ---
Mbande Kurova guva/umbuyiso (welcome the return of a deceased
family member's spirit

Isitshikitsha and | During celebrations

Ingquzu

Amabhiza Rain making dances at Njelele Shrine

and Hosana

Amantshomane| Appeasing spirits (Umthethelo)

Activity 4

1. Sing songs and do traditional dances.
2. In groups, make a list of musical intruments played when traditional dances
are performed.

Exercise 3

1. Music and dances are meant to the spirits.
A. disappoint B. remove C. appease
African traditional dances and music are performed during ——_.
During which ceremonies do people dance amantshomane?
Name three instruments played during traditional dances.
Name two rain making dances performed at Njelele Shrine.

6E. Religious artefacts and attire

aAkwWN



--- Page 49 ---
Religious artefacts are important items made for use in religion. They are used in
ceremonies and rituals. Each artefact has a special meaning attached to it. These
artefacts are used for different reasons and they vary from one ethnic group to
another. The most common artefacts are the traditional gourd, knobkerrie and the
snuff container. The traditional gourd is usually used to carry beer when people
are performing different rituals. The snuff container is used to carry snuff which is
used when performing rituals. Tsvimbo/intonga is a symbol of authority.

Religious clothing for Indigenous Religion was adopted from the way the ancestral
parents dressed. The clothes were simple animal skins. In some cases, black and
white cloth is wrapped or draped around the body. The spirit mediums svikiro/
isanuse are usually the ones who wear special attire. What is most emphasized
when people go to places of worship is that they remove shoes. They also remove
other ornamental wear such as head gear and wrist watches. Modern attire is not
encouraged when the rituals are in progress. This is done to show respect for the
shrine.

Activity 5

1. In groups, collect pictures of different artefacts used in Indigenous Religion.
2. Discuss the use of artefacts and say what they symbolize.

Exercise 4

. Name three common religious artefacts in Indigenous Religion.

. African spirituality dressing was adopted from —_.

. Who usually wear special attire at ceremonies?

. Which artefact is used to carry beer when performing rituals?

. Why are people attending ceremonies at religious shrines asked to remove
their shoes?

6F. Sacred days: chisi/izilo

In Indigenous Religion, there is a day that is set aside for rest and carrying out of
rituals. This day is known as chisi/izilo. Doing work on this day is forbidden by the
tribal spiritual guardian of that land. It is believed that if one goes to the fields
on this day the spirits of the land will be angry. This can lead to misfortune and
a penalty might be given to such a person by the authorities of that area. Chisi/
izilo is not set on the same day throughout the country. Some rest on Wednesday
and some rest on Thursday or Friday. The local leadership, such as village head or
chief, will monitor and ensure that people respect the day.


--- Page 50 ---
Activity 6

1. Find out which day is set aside for rest in your area.
2. Discuss the importance of chisi/izilo.

Exercise 5

. The day for rest in African tradition is known as —_.
A. Sabbath B. chisi/izilo C. rest

. Who makes sure that the day of rest is followed?

. What happens to the person who goes to work on the field on the day of
rest?

. Which day is set aside for rest in your community?

. —~ gets angry when the day of rest is not observed.

Project 2B

Make a poster of the different symbols and artefacts that Indigenous Religion
uses.

Summary

Indigenous Religion knowledge is passed on from generation to generation.
God is called by many names according to different languages.
Indigenous Religion has many sacred places used for worship.

African traditional songs and dance reflect the culture of the people.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Who is the founder of Indigenous Religion?

A. people of long ago B. noone knows

C. elderly D. young generation

Indigenous Religion does not have religious books. Information is __.
A. handed down from generation to generation

B. read from history books

C. just thought and they come up with whatever they think
D. shared ata meeting

The most common name for God in Shona is —__.

A. Mwari B. UMlimu

C. Mubereki D. Mudzimu



--- Page 51 ---
Which day is set aside for rest in African tradition?
A.  Chisi/izilo B. Mukwerera
C. Nyaradzo/memorial D. Nhimbe/cooperatives
The most common name for God in Ndebele is ___.
A. Idlozi B. Mwari
C. uMlimu D. God
The name of a place used for worship in a traditional round hut is __.
A. kitchen B. banya
C. cupboard D. chikuva/emsamo
In Indigenous Religion, people believe that the spirit of the —__ lives.
A. dead B. living
C. father D.. noone
Which creature is regarded as the water spirit?
A. Mhondoro B. njuzu/mermaid
C. Nyaminyami D. lion
Which dressing items are not encouraged when attending African rituals?
A. mordern clothes B. trousers
C. shoes D. jerseys
10. Which statement is true about Indigenous Religion?
A. There isone common symbol. B. Symbols vary according to culture.
C. Anything can be symbol. D. There is no god.

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
According to Indigenous Religion, who created everything?
Which creature is known as the water spirit?
Why do people sing and dance at the ceremonies in Indigenous Religion?
Name three artefacts in Indigenous Religion and explain their use.
The day for rest in Indigenous Religion is known as —_.

[15 marks]

Glossary

Artefacts objects used for cultural reasons.

Dwelling a place of residence.

Ornamental decorative or attractive wear.

Rituals religious ceremony with a series of actions.

Supernatural something that cannot be understood naturally.
It is often linked to gods.



--- Page 52 ---
Unit 7 Christianity

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
identify the founder of Christianity
state names and titles of the Supreme Being
state the sacred days
identify places of worship
identify the Christian symbol
identify religious attire
name the holy book.

Background

Christianity is a religion based on believing that Jesus Christ is the link between
man and God.

Be Key words
V4 pentecost founder created

bible

7A. Founder of Christianity



--- Page 53 ---
The founder of christianity is Jesus Christ. Christianity is a religion based on the
life and teachings of Jesus Christ. Followers of Christianity are called Christians.
Christians believe in the forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

Activity 1

1. Go and research about the birth of Jesus.
2. In groups, dramatise the birth of Jesus.

7B. Names of supreme being

God is the Supreme being in Christianity. He is known by many names which are:
Jehovah Jireh — The Lord will provide
Yahweh - Lord Jehovah
Jehovah Shalom - The Lord is peace
El Shaddai — Lord God Almighty
El Olam - The Everlasting God
These names show the qualities of God.

Christians believe that God is the creator of everything in the world. The story of
creation is found in the book of Genesis, chapter one in the bible.

Activity 2

Go outside the classroom. Look around at everything you see.
1. Draw all the things created by God that you saw.
2. Write the names of the things you have drawn.

Exercise 4

created people.
A. God B. Jesus C. father
. The founder of Christianity is
A. God B. Genesis C. Jesus
. Which name of God shows that he is the Lord God Almighty?
A. El Olam B. El Shaddai C. Yahweh
. What does Yahweh mean?
. What other things were created by God?



--- Page 54 ---
A sacred day is a day set aside for worship and remembering an important event in
a religion. In Christianity the sacred days are associated with the life of Jesus Christ
from his birth to his death.

The most important Christian holy days are Easter. Easter celebrates the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Resurrection is when a dead person comes to life. Jesus
was tried and crucified in Jerusalem. He suffered a very cruel death by being nailed
to the cross. Christians believe that Jesus died for the forgiveness of our sins. Some of
the Christian sacred days are listed in the table below.

Sacred day Period Activity

Christmas December 25 Celebration of the birth of Jesus
Christ

Easter No fixed dates Remembering the death and

(Once a year, Friday to resurrection of Jesus Christ
Sunday)

Weekly ¢ Sundays Worshipping
worship ¢ Sabbath (sunset Friday
day to sunset Saturday)



--- Page 55 ---
Activity 3

1. Using computers, research on other sacred days for Christians.
2 Present your findings to the class.

Exercise 2

. The most important Christian Holy days are .
A. Heroes day B. Easter C. Ash Wednesday
. What is the name of the town where Jesus was tried and crucified?
A. Capernaum B. Bethlehem C. Jerusalem
. Jesus was sentenced to
. Jesus faced a death.
. Which holiday do Christians celebrate the birth of Jesus?

Christians have different denominations. Each church denomination has its
own special kind of attire. They encourage decent attire and emphasise that
worn clothes should be loose and tight fitting clothes should be avoided.
Zimbabwean Christians have adopted the idea of wearing uniforms for
sub-groups of their church. Most women groups in Zimbabwean churches wear
regalia specific to their church. Other churches have special attire for all members.
Some church leaders like reverends and priests wear distinct regalia, like gowns

and collars during service.


--- Page 56 ---
Activity 4

1. In groups, collect pictures of decently dressed people.
2. Draw a picture of a priest or reverend in their church service regalia.

Exercise 3

. What do Christians wear?
A. Decentclothes  B. Brightly coloured clothes C. Tight fitting clothes.
. Describe the type of clothes worn by Christian women in Zimbabwe.
. Which clothes should be avoided?
. Which important people in some churches wear special clothes?
. Reverends and priests may wear and

7E. Christian symbol

The symbol used by Christians is a cross. The cross reminds Christians of how Jesus
suffered before his death. Jesus was made to carry his cross to the place of
crucifixion. The cross was made of heavy logs. At Golgotha also known as Calvary,
Jesus was nailed to the cross. Some crosses are plain while some have an image of
Jesus Christ on them. The symbol is often seen on church buildings. Some crosses
are worn as ornaments. Some Christian church logos bear the cross.

Activity 5

1. In groups, make a Christian cross using sticks, cardboard or clay.
2. Collect as many Christian church logos as you can.
3. Look at all church logos you collected. What is similar about all the logos?



--- Page 57 ---
Exercise 4

. The symbol used by Christians is

A. sticks B. across C. astar
. Jesus was crucified at a place called .

A. Calvary B. Jerusalem C. Joppa
. What is the other name for Golgotha?
. What does the cross remind Christians of?
. Where is the cross also used?

Most Christians use a church building as their place of worship. There are some
Christians like the Apostolic churches who worship in open spaces. Some worship
under trees and others on mountains. Christians sometimes gather in their homes
to worship.

Activity 6

1. Talk about the various places of worship for Christians.



--- Page 58 ---
7G. The holy book

The Holy Bible

The Christian holy book is the bible. It was written long ago. It was written by men
at different times. It is made up of 66 books and these are divided into the Old and
the New Testaments. The Old Testament has 39 books and the New Testament
has 27 books. The Old Testament tells us about how the earth was created. We
also learn that at times God could speak to us through prophets. The first book of
The Bible is called “Genesis”. The word genesis means the beginning. We learn
about Jesus Christ in the New Testament. The New Testament also tells us how the
first church began. It is from the same testament that Christians learn how to live
as Christians. The last book in the Bible is called “Revelations”. The Bible is found in
many countries around the world. It has been written in many different languages
as well.

Activity 7

Singing the song:

“My Bible and !”

“My Bible, my Bible and 1,
My Bible, my Bible and I,

Oh! What a wonderful saviour.
God gave without measure.
We are travelling together
My Bible and |.”



--- Page 59 ---
Project 2C

Collect symbols and artefacts of different religions. Place these in the Family,
Religion and Moral Education corner.

Summary

The founder of Christianity is Jesus Christ.
Christians do not have a specific religious aitire.
The symbol for Christianity is a cross.

Christians’ holy book is the bible.

Exercise 5

. When was the Bible written?
A. Along time ago. B. When Jesus was born.
C. Two thousand years ago.
. The Bible was written by .
A. one person B. different people C. Christians
. Into how many parts is the Bible divided?
. The first book of the Bible is called .
. The last book in the Bible is called .

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

The symbol for Christianity is .

A. aring B. astar

C. across D. amoon

Jesus was crucified at a place called

A. Golgotha B. Jerusalem

C. Nazareth D. Egypt

What are Christians?

A. Believers in ancestors B. Believers in Christ
C. Believers in life after death D. Believers in prophets
We learn about Jesus Christ in the

A. Old Testament . New Testament

C. book of Genesis . Indigenous Religion
Christians worship on

A. Friday . Saturday

C. Sunday . different days



--- Page 60 ---
What kind of attire is encouraged by Christians? ;

A. decent attire B. _ tight fitting clothes
C. brightly coloured clothes D. robes
7. Jesus died
A. at night B. onthe cross
C. inone week D. by himself
8. What is celebrated on Easter holidays?
A. birth of Jesus B. death and resurrection of Jesus
C. creation of the world D. nothing
9. In which biblical testament is the story of creation?
A. The New Testament. B. The Old Testament.

C. In both New and Old Testaments. D. Revelations.
10. The Bible is arranged into chapters and

A. verses B. units
C. paragraphs D. books

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
Who is the founder of Christianity?

Which name means the Lord will provide in Christianity?
Where do Christians worship?

is the symbol for Christians.

Describe the Christian attire.

PON

Glossary

Attire dressed in clothes of a specified kind.

Regalia clothing worn as an indication of status.
Crucifixion an old form of punishment in which a person was nailed
or bound to a cross.



--- Page 61 ---
Unit 8 Judaism

Objectives

Y the end of the unit, you should be able to:
name the founder member
state the names and the titles of the Supreme Being
identify the place of worship
state the sacred days in Judaism
identify the Jewish symbol
identify religious attire
list the holy books.

Background
Judaism is one of the oldest religions which believes in one God.

; () Key words

synagogue torah passover

8A. The founder of Judaism

The founder of Judaism is Abraham the father of the Jewish people. God made
a covenant with Abraham. Abraham was promised a lot of descendants who
became the Jewish nation. Abraham promised to worship God. Abraham trusted
and obeyed God. God later gave Moses a descendent of Abraham, the 10
commandments which became the basis of Judaism.

8B. Names and titles of the Supreme Being

Judaism believes in only one God. God in Judaism is called by many names.
They consider Yahweh as the proper name for God. Yahweh means God is Lord.


--- Page 62 ---
Yahweh is the same as Jehovah in English. The other names of God are:
Adonai — Lord

El Shaddai - God Almighty

El Hai — Living God

Activity 1

1. In groups, research on the religions that trace back their history to Abraham.

Exercise 1

. Whois the founder of Judaism?
A. God B. Abraham
. Give two names of God in Judaism.
. Jews believe in God.
. What does Adonai mean?
. In Judaism, is the proper name of God.



--- Page 63 ---
The synagogue is the place of worship for the Jews. Besides worshipping, it is
also used as a community centre and a place for studying. The Jews sometimes
see it as a temple. In the past, Jews used to have a temple in Jerusalem as their
holiest place. The temple was built by King Solomon. The Jews also believe that
it is better to worship as a group than to pray alone. The synagogue provides for
that purpose.

Activity 2

1. In groups, discuss uses of various places of worship you know.
2. TARGET: build as many words as you can using the given letters. Do not leave
out the centre letter.

Exercise 2

. The synagogue is a place of
A. worship B. playinggames C. selling
. What else is the synagogue used for?
A. play centre B. studying C. buying and selling
. Where did Jews pray in the past?
. The synagogue is almost like a to the Jews.

. Judaists also believe that it is better to worship as a than



--- Page 64 ---
Jews observe some days which they regard as holy. The major holidays are:

e Rosh Hashanah - which marks the Jewish year.

¢ Passover — which marks the day the children of Israel were delivered from
bondage of Egypt.

Pentecost — which marks the revelation of law given to Moses at Mount Sinai.
Tebernacles — which celebrates Israel's 40 years in the desert.

Day of Atonement and repentance — which is observed by fasting and prayers.
Sabbath day - is observed every week from sunset Friday to sunset Saturday.
All the holy days do not fall on the same dates of the calendar. They change from
year to year.

Exercise 3

. The Holy day which marks the beginning of the year is .
A. Passover B. Pentecost C. Rosh Hashanah
. Which day is observed by fasting and prayers?

A. Day of atonment B. Tabernacles C. Passover
. Which holy day is shared by both Jews and Christians?
. Which Jewish holiday celebrates 40 years Israelites soend in the desert?
. In which country were Jews kept as slaves?

8D. Symbol

The Judaism symbol is the star of David. It has many meanings. The star that points
up represents God and the one that points down represents Jews on earth. Thus,
the star is a connection between God and man. The star of David is found on the
synagogues and they wear jewellery that features the star of David today.

Activity 3

1. In groups, make a model star of David.
2. Research on places where the star of David is found.

3. Present your findings to the class.



--- Page 65 ---
Exercise 4

. is the symbol of Jews.
. Which part of the star represents God?
A. bottom side B. upper left side C. upperside
. Which part of the star represents people?
. The star is the connection between and
. Where do we find the star of David?

Generally, Jews dress according to places they are found. Certain religious

clothes are required by the Torah. Women are generally not supposed to wear

clothes that are either tight fitting or bright. The sleeves have to cover the elbows

and the skirts should cover knees. Women also wear long skirts because pants

are forbidden. The Torah forbids men to wear women's garments and vice versa.

Certain specified dress is for the clergy like the high priests. Special attire won by

the Jews includes the following:

° Kippah (a skull cap) won to remind the Jews to follow the laws of God
at all times.

¢ — Tallit (a prayer shawl) worn before prayer and worship.

¢ — Tefihn (small leather boxes with long leather straps attached). The boxes are
worn on the left arm and on the forehead. Inside the boxes are passages of

the scriptures.


--- Page 66 ---
Activity 4

1. In groups, collect and paste pictures of people wearing different types of
clothes.
2. Compare the dress codes for Judaism men and Jewish women.

Exercise 5

. Jewish women should not wear clothes.
A. loose B. dresses C. tight fitting and bright
. Clothes sleeves should cover
A. hands B. knees C. elbows
. What kind of skirts should women wear?
. Which other clothes are forbidden to women?
. Specific clothes are for

WEW (PS
SRANSLAS (OS
~ ACCORDING T
TWEE TRADYT VOT
)  WEBREW VEXN Fo

Wo KORATA- NENIM KETHONIYY

The Jewish holy book is the Tanakh. It is divided into three parts which are the Torah,
the Nevim and the Kethuvim. The Torah contains the five first books of the Bible.
The Nevim are the books of the prophets and the Kethuvim are the remaining
writings of the Bible. The Tanakh is only made up of the Old testament of the bible.
To the Jews, there is nothing like the new and old testament.

Activity 5

1. Research on the first five books of the bible.
2. Present your findings to the class.



--- Page 67 ---
Exercise 6

. The holy book of Jews is called the .
A. Old Testament B. Bible C. Tanakh

. The book which contains the first five books of the Tanakh is called
. The Tanakh is divided into parts.

. Do Jews have the New Testament?

. The old testament makes up the Tanakh. True/false.

Summary

e The Jewish holy book is the Tanakh.
e Jews base their teachings in the first five books of the bible.
e The star of David is the Jewish symbol.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Judaism is practiced by ___..

A. Muslims . Jews

C. Indigenous . Christians
Jews are descendants of

A. Nehanda . Moses
C. Abraham . Jesus
Holy book for Judaism is the

A. Tanakh B. Bible

C. Koran D. Novel
Some Jews believe in after death.

A. eating . laughing

C. family . life
Jews believe in God.

A. one B. two
Cc. three D. four
Who created the universe?

A. Jesus B. God

C. Abraham D. Spirit mediums

The Torah contains the by which Jews should live by.
A. laws B. gossip

C. ideas D. fashion



--- Page 68 ---
8. Their soecial place of worship is the .
A. Temple B. Church
C. Synagogue D. Mosque
9. Judaism is based on first books of the bible.
A. two B. three
C. four D. five
10. Who does Judaism believe as the prophet?
A. Jesus Christ B. Spirit medium
C. Abraham D. Muhammad

Structured questions

Answer all questions
Give two names of God in Judaism.
Which book contains the five books of the bible?
What is the meaning of the star of David?
Which part of the star represents people?
Name two Holy days for Jews.

Glossary

Judaism the religion developed among the ancient Hebrews
that stresses beliefs in God and faithfulness to the laws of
the Torah.

Bondage state of being a slave.

Clergy group of all people ordained for religious duties.

Forbids refuses to allow.



--- Page 69 ---
Objectives

Y the end of the unit, you should be able to:
name the founder of Islam
state the names and titles of Supreme Being in Islam
identify the place of worship in Islam
state the holy days in Islam
identify the symbol for Islam
identify the attire in Islam
state the holy book.

Background

Isham originated in the middle-east. It was then spread to Africa through Arab
traders who came to do business with Africans.

Key words
J K
oran Mosque

9A. Founder of Islam



--- Page 70 ---
The founder of Islam is the prophet Muhammad. He is believed to be in line with
other prophets who include Moses and Jesus. Muhammad began working as a
trader. He then worked for a rich woman by the name of Khadija. He later on
married the lady. At about the age of forty he began to see visions and heard
voices from nowhere. It is then said the angel Gabriel appeared to him. From then
he was led to heaven where he talked to Allah. Allah is the name given to God by
the Muslims. Muhammad came back to spread the message of Islam.

Exercise 1

. The founder of the religion of Islam is .
A. Jesus Christ B. Muhammad C. Moses
. According to Islam, Jesus was a

A. founder B. prophet C. God
. Who is the angel who appeared before Muhammad?
. At what age did Muhammad start to see visions?
. Who was Muhammad's wife?

9B. Names and titles of Supreme Being

Allah is said to be called by names as many as ninety-nine. The names mostly
indicate the qualities of Allah. They are used in the Koran and Hadith. Certain
Muslim beliefs are clearly stated in the Koran. The Koran states that a righteous
person is the one who believes in Allah, scriptures, the last days, angels and the
prophets. Islam also teaches that there is one God.

Some of the names of Allah are:

¢ The Merciful —He who acts in extreme kindness.

The Eternal Lord — The one with complete power and is perfect.

The Mighty One - The strong, the defeater who is not defeated.

The Creator — The one who brings everything to life.

The Great Forgiver — The one who forgives the sins of his followers, time and
again.

Activity 1

1. In groups, make a list of words that describe a person.

2. Use some of the words to describe your father or mother.



--- Page 71 ---
Exercise 2

Allah is said to be called by names.

A. ten B. hundred C. ninety-nine
All the names show Allah's .

A. habits B. qualities C. beliefs
Where are the Muslims’ beliefs stated?

What is a righteous person?

How many gods do Muslims believe in?

Muslims pray in buildings called mosques. The model for building mosques was
Muhammad's house in Medina. A mosque is basically a house of prayer. There
are no benches or chairs. Worshippers pray in rows facing Mecca. There are no
statues or pictures on the walls. Some verses of the Koran may be written on the
wall. Every mosque has a Mihrab. This is used to show the direction of Mecca.
Muslim prayer places must be clean and smart all the time. Muslims pray five times
a day.


--- Page 72 ---
Activity 2

1. In groups, collect and paste pictures of mosques.
2. Complete the crossword puzzle.

Across:

2 Shape of mosque roof

4 House of prayer

5 Number of times to pray

Down:

3 One who prays through Allah
1 Period

Exercise 3

. Muslims pray in a building called a .
A. Church B. Mosque C. Synagogue
. Muhammad's house was in a town called ;
A. Mecca B. Medina C. Jerusalem
. How many times do Muslims pray in a day?
. What shape are the mosque roofs?
. Which other place can prayers be said?



--- Page 73 ---
Ramadan is considered the holiest period in the Islamic year. It is held during the
entire 9th luna month of the year. All Muslims over the age of 12 years are supposed
to fast from sunrise to sundown. Eil Al-Fitr is celebrated at the end of Ramadan. The
Muslims usually sacrifice a sheep and distribute the meat in three parts; among
family, friends and the poor. The Muslims mark the beginning of the new year with
a festival called Al-Hijira.

9E. Symbol

*

The symbol of Islam is the crescent and star. However, some Muslims use other
symbols which are not the crescent and the star.

Activity 3

1. In groups, discuss what prophets do.

2. Research on other Muslim holy days.
3. Present your findings to the class.



--- Page 74 ---
9F. Muslim dress code

Muslim women wear clothes that cover their bodies completely. In addition, they
wear a veil which covers the head and leaves the face only. The veil is said to
be shielding women from western influence. It is considered that display of hair is
immodest. They have a kind of cloth called hijab. The hijab must cover the whole
body except the face and hands. Both men and women should not wear tight
fitting clothes even if they cover the whole body. Clothing should not attract the
opposite gender.

Activity 4

1. In groups, collect pictures of Muslims. Paste them onto a chart.

Exercise 4

. Women's clothes should cover .
A. some parts of the body. B. the body completely
C. chest and legs only

. What is used to cover women's heads?
A. gown B. robe C. veil

. Women are shielded from .

. Which clothes are forbidden?

. Clothing should not attract .



--- Page 75 ---
9G. The holy book

The Muslim holy book is the Koran, also spelt as Qur’an. The Koran is said to have
been written based on revelations made by Allah to Muhammad. It is seen by
Muslims as the finest piece of literature in the language of the Arabs. The Koran is
said to be a book of guidance. It is used along with the hadith to interpret Sharia
law.

Exercise 5

Muslim holy book is .

A. Koran B. Torah C. Bible
The Koran was written based on .

A. Islamic beliefs B. what Muslims want

C. revelations from Allah to Muhammad

The Koran is regarded as a book of .

Which law is used by the Muslims?

Who wrofe the Koran?

Summary
e¢ The holy book for muslims is the Koran.
¢ Prophet Muhammad started the Islamic religion.
¢« Muslims’ holiest month is Ramadan.

Allah is called by ninety-nine names.
End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions
Islam is practiced by —__.

A. Judaist B. Christians
C. Muslims D. Indigenous



--- Page 76 ---
Muslims pray facing
A. Medina . Mecca
C. Jerusalem . Joppa
The founder of Islam is ‘
A. Jesus christ . Moses
C. Abraham . Muhammad
The Muslim name for God is .
A. Yaweh B. Allah
C. Mudzimu D. Mwari
Who was the angel that appeared to Muhammad?
A. Michael B. Abraham
C. Gabriel D. Kadija
Muhammad was working as a
A. shepherd B. lawyer
C. trader D. teacher
Which is the holiest period in the islamic year?
A. Ramadan B. Christmas
C. Easter D. — Ejl Al-Fitr
The cloth worn by muslim women that covers the whole body is called
A. veil B. gown
C. hijab D. dress
Which is the holy book for Muslims?
A. Torah B. Koran
C. Bible D. Directory
10. Mosque is a place of worship for .
A. Muslims B. Christians
C. Judaism D. Indigenous Religion

Structured questions
Answer all questions below.

1. Muslims call their Supreme Being .

Muslims believe that stands between Allah and people.
is the founding father of Islam.

Muslims pray in a

Muslims believe in supreme beings.

Muslims pray times a day.

A Mirab is used to show '

Muhammad's house was found in
was Muhammad's wife.
is considered a prophet in Islam.

eansagoa0c90

[20 marks]



--- Page 77 ---
Glossary

Universe - all of space and everything in it including stars, planets.
Hadith - collection of traditions containing sayings of Muhammad.

End of term two assessment

Multiple choice questions

Which religion believes that the dead have a role to play in family lives?
A. Christianity B. Indigenous Religion
C. Judaism D. Islam
Which religion believes that the strongest group of related people is a family?
A. Christianity only B. Indigenous Religion only
C. Judaism only D. Allreligions
Judaism believes in the worship of only God.
A. one B. five
C. two D. many
Indigenous Religion believes in .
A. holy books B. worshipping God through prophets
C. worship of God through ancestors
D. noone
The special place in the African kitchen is .
A. chikuva/emsamo B. banya
C. hozi D. chofo
is a sign of authority in Indigenous Religion.
A. Tswanda B. Winnowing basket
C. Tsvimbo/Intonga D. Anaxe
Which one of these is not a religious artefact for Indigenous Religion?
A. Cross B. traditional gourd
C. knobkerrie D. snuff container
is regarded as the water spirit.
A. Zimbabwe bird . Asnake
C. Mudzimu . Mermaid/Njuzu/Injuzi
Who is the founder of Judaism?
A. Jesus Christ . Abraham
C. Elders . Muhammad
10. The founder of Christianity is .
A. Abraham B. Muhammad
C. Jesus Christ D. Prophets



--- Page 78 ---
. All religions believe in .

A. _ life after death B. Jesus Christ

C. Muhammad D. Abraham

. The most important Christian holiday is

A. Sundays B. Easter

C. Pentecost D. Independence

. The symbol used by Christians is

A. the axe B. the cross

C. astar D. the moon

. Muslims worship in a

A. the crescent moon and star B. amosque

C. the harp D. the cross

. Asacred place is a

A. ceremony B. where people stay
C. important place of worship D. holy day

. The Christian Bible is divided into two parts which are
Testaments.

A. _ first and second B. one and two

C. Old and New D. Pentecostal

. The name for God in Islam is

A. Ebenezar B. Mwari

C. Elyon D. Allah

. Muslims pray in a building called —___.

A. Mosque B. Church

C. Temple D. Synagogue
. The Muslim holy book is the .

A. Koran B. Bible

C. Torah D. dictionary

_ A in a mosque shows the direction of Mecca.
A. Koran B. Mihrab

C. dome D. cross

. Muslims pray times in a day.

A. four B. five

C. six D. seven

. The Ndebele name for God is

A. Sibanda B. Umlimu

C. Mudzimu D. Mwari

. What is the symbol for Judaism

A. Torah B. star of David

C. synagogue D. Tanakh

. Judaism bases its beliefs on the first books of the Bible.
A. three B. four

C. five D. ten



--- Page 79 ---
25. Who received the ten commandments from God?
A. Abraham B. Moses
C. Jesus Christ D. Allah

Structured questions

Answer question one and any two questions.
Read and answer questions that follow.

Zimbabwe is a multi-cultural society. It has people whose cultures vary from one
tribe to another. The country has a wide range of people of different acceptable
religions. The Zimbabwean constitution allows that people live in peace and
harmony. This is because no one is said to be more important than the other.
1. How many cultures are in Zimbabwe?
How many religions are allowed in Zimbabwe?
Zimbabweans live in .
Which religion is better than the other?
Which law allows people to have freedom of worship?
Name three religious reference books.
wrote the bible.
How are Indigenous Religion teachings passed from one generation to
another?
Name two scared places in Indigenous Religion?
Which rituals are performed at the Njelele Shrine?
Why are totems important?
What is the difference between monogamous and polygamous families?
How do communities help the needy?
Which religion believes in the dead taking part in the living?
Name one example of needy people in communities.
Draw the symbols for each religion.
(i) Indigenous Religion
(ii) Christianity —__
(iii) Judaism
Why are religious symbols important?

a.
b.
Cc.
d.
e.
a.
b.
Cc.

aogpanva9a

[40 marks]



--- Page 80 ---
Morals and values

Introduction

To be a good person, one has to have good morals. People need to respect each
other to live in peace. One has to be useful to self and others.


--- Page 81 ---
Unit 10 Concept of morals and values

Objectives

ny the end of the unit, you should be able to:

state what is right and wrong at home and at school

describe attributes of good morals

state the importance of belonging to a religion

explain the responsibilities associated with a particular religion
demonstrate ways of showing respect for other human beings
state benefits of showing respect for other human beings
state the positive ways of treating each other fairly

explain benefits attached to good behaviour

state the rights and responsibilities of citizens.

WDNAMARWN>

Background

Children understand the need to have morals and values to suit the society they
live in. They can greet elders and others in the right manner. They belong to a
family unit where their rights are observed.

ye Key words
V4 right responsibilities wrong morals respect

values rights fairness citizen



--- Page 82 ---
10A. Right and wrong

We all should know what is right and what is wrong. Something that is right is good.
Something that is wrong is bad. Our families, the community and religion all help
us to know what is right and what is wrong. Everyone must always try to do the
right things. Sometimes we do wrong things without knowing that it is bad. If you
do wrong things you may get punished.

There are many right things that we can do at home and at school. Some of them
are:

¢ telling the truth

respecting one another

forgiving one another

working hard

treating one another fairly

being kind and helpful like helping the needy

respecting one another.

There are also some wrong things that we do at home and at school. Some of
them are:

° telling lies

being disrespectful to others

being unforgiving

laziness

treating others unfairly

being irresponsible

being unkind and unhelpful

stealing.

Activity 1

1. In groups, list the good things you do at home and class.
2. In groups, discuss and list wrong things we do at home and school.



--- Page 83 ---
Exercise 1

Something that is right is .
When something is wrong it is

People should always try to do what is wrong. True or false?

Tatenda was hungry and ate the baby’s porridge. She told her mother that
the dog had eaten the porridge. Was this right or wrong?

If you do something wrong you may be

_—_

10B. Attributes of good morals

Morals are the guidelines that tell us what is right and what is wrong. They come from
the self, family, society and religion. Good morals make us do the right things. There
are many things that show good morals. Respecting elders shows good morals.
For example, kneeling when greeting elders shows respect. Being responsible is
also an attribute of good morals. One has to be responsible to self, others and
the environment. Making sure that you do not pollute the environment shows
responsibility.

Other signs of good morals are:

° being polite

e being loving and caring

° being reliable.


--- Page 84 ---
Activity 2

1. In groups, do a role play that shows good morals. Discuss each role play as
a class and list the good morals shown in each role play.

Exercise 2

help us to choose between what is right or wrong.
Morals can come from religion. True or false?
make us do the right things.
Respecting elders shows morals.
Zwanga is travelling on a bus. He eats a banana and throws the peel out of
the window. Does this show good or bad morals?

10C. Right to belong to a religion

Belonging to a religion makes you to be with people who think like you. You share
ideas and it makes you happy. Belonging to a religion shapes your character.
Religion can give people rules on what is right and what is wrong. You have already
seen how religions give people rules on things like marriage.

There are many religions and one can belong to any one of them. We are born
in families with different religions. As children, we often follow the religion of the
family we are born into. As we grow older, we start to understand ourselves and


--- Page 85 ---
decide things for ourselves. We may decide to choose a different religion from
that which our parents follow. Each person has a right to choose the religion they
want. Family members can belong to different religions. It is important to respect
one another's religion.

Each religion has responsibilities. This is what you are required to do as part of the
religion. Responsibilities can be how you dress, what you eat and what you are
expected to do on particular days. When you belong to a religion, you have the
duty to learn and follow the rules of that religion.

In groups, list the religions in your communities.

Choose one religion. Research on the responsibilities of that religion. You
can ask some followers of the religion and use the internet. Present your
findings to the class.

Exercise 3

One importance of belonging to a religion is .

A person has a right to choose a . (family/religion)

We should religions different from ours. (respect/laugh at)
Family members can belong to different religions. True or false?
Every religion has . (a holy book/ responsibilities)

10D. Respect for other human beings



--- Page 86 ---
It is always good to have respect for other people. Respect is when you show that
you care for other people's beliefs and feelings. You treat others in a good way.
There are many ways of showing respect to others. Treating others as equals shows
respect. Caring for others and sharing with them also shows respect. Respect can
be shown by greeting others in the proper way.

It is a good thing to respect others because they will respect you too. When you
respect people they will like you. This makes them want to help you. You make good
friends when you respect people. Respecting others makes you understand other
people’s beliefs. It becomes easy to live with one another in peace. Respecting
others makes one happy. Countries and societies have rules and laws that help
people to respect one another.

Activity 4

IN groups, prepare a play that shows ways of showing respect for other
human beings. Present your play to the class.

Exercise 4

Respect is when you
A. feel you are the best
B. show that you care for other people's beliefs and feelings
C. care for your feelings alone
Which of the following does not show respect for others?
A. treating them as equals
B. caring for them
C. beating them
others in a proper way shows respect.
A. Poking B. Greeting C. Hitting
If you respect others they will .
A. think youareafool B. laughatyou C. respect you too
What do the countries have to help people respect one another?
A. Rules and laws B. Prisons C. holy books

10E. Rights and responsibilities in fairness

We should always treat one another in fairness. Fairness is treating one another the
same way. No one is regarded as being more important than the other. Fairness
is also treating one another in a positive way. Everyone should be treated with

fairness.



--- Page 87 ---
a) Positive ways of treating one another

There are many ways of treating one another in a positive way. These include:
e showing kindness. You can do this by helping others in need. You can
do more than you have been asked to do when helping others
¢ not talking bad things about other people
¢ respecting other people's property and beliefs
* speaking to others with respect.

b) Benefits of good behaviour

If you do good things, others will do good things for you too. You get respected
and loved by people. You will be happy knowing that you are a good person.
Doing good things will make you feel good about yourself. Good behaviour will
make your parents proud of you.

c) Rights and responsibilities of citizens

Rights are basic needs which everyone in the world should have. Children have
aright to a name and country and to be treated well. They have a right to family
care, to be protected against anything which can harm them or their health. A
child has rights to shelter, education and also to be heard. Doing household chores
or work is not child labour. Having rights comes with responsibilities. Children should
help at home and do their chores. They should also be responsible for looking after
their belongings and that of their family.

Staying in a country makes one belong to that country. To belong to a country is
to be a citizen. It is then a duty for everyone to be a responsible citizen. Cattle in
our Country are viewed as wealth and are protected.


--- Page 88 ---
Mutizwa the thief

Mutizwa was a thief. One day he stole three cattle and drove them to the butchery
fifty kilometers away. Luckily, the owner of the cattle had used his mobile phone
to tell others about his missing cattle. He even went to the police. Everyone was
looking for the cattle. A little boy saw the cattle with Mutizwa and ran to tell his
parents. The parents then phoned the owner and the police. Mutizwa was arrested
that same afternoon and the cattle were returned to the owner. Mutizwa had
failed to act as a responsible citizen.

Activity 6

1. In groups, discuss how your community has been responsible.

Exercise 5

What is fairness?

Who should be treated with fairness?

If you do good things you will be loved and respected. True or false?
Rights come with .

We all should be citizens.



--- Page 89 ---
Summary

° We should all know what is right and what is wrong.

e Our families, the community and religion help us to know what is right and
what is wrong.

Morals tell us what is right and what is wrong.

Everyone has a right to choose their religion.

We should respect one another.

Rights come with responsibilities.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

is a right thing to do.
A. Telling lies B. Working hard
C. Laziness D. Stealing
We should alll each other.
A. respect B. hate
C. fight D. Kill
help us to choose between what is right and wrong.
A. Rights B. Responsibilities
C. Morals D. Respect
When one is wrong, they should ask for
A. punishment . forgiveness
C. nothing . friendship
Every citizen has
A. rights . family
C. friends . ahome
Every country has rules and
A. people . laws
C. cattle . police
Everyone has a right to choose
A. parents . a family
Cc. areligion . to do bad things
What will happen if you respect others?
A. Others will think you are a fool. . People will respect you too.
C. You will be a bad person. . People will laugh at you.
is a crime.
A. Stealing B. Singing
C. Shouting D. Eating
10. are viewed as wealth in our country.
A. Trees B. Cattle
C. Children D. Many children



--- Page 90 ---
Structured questions

Answer all the questions below.
make us do the right things.
Every religion has (responsibilities/holy books)
List three attributes of good morals.
Give two examples of rights of children.
Everyone has a right to belong to a . (club/religion)
[15 marks]

Glossary

Disrespectful - showing lack of respect
Attribute - acharacteristic of something



--- Page 91 ---
Unit 11 Conflict and conflict management

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. identify causes of conflicts at home

2. identify causes of conflicts with friends
3. suggest and explain ways of managing conflict at home.

Background

Children have been involved in arguments at home and school. They have learnt
to resolve the arguments. At times we have problems in the family. We should help
each other solve the problems.

Bw Key words
pp conflict conflict management

11A. Conflict at home



--- Page 92 ---
Conflict occurs when people have a disagreement. There are many causes of
conflict athome. When brothers and sisters are jealous of each other conflicts arise.
All of them will be wanting their parent's attention at once and when the parent
seems to be giving one child more attention than the other, they become jealous
of each other. Sharing of resources can cause conflict at home. Introduction of
new family members can also lead to conflict. This Usually happens when one
parent dies and the remaining parent decides to remarry and the children fail to
accept the new parent.

Activity 1

List things that cause conflict at home.

11B. Conflict with friends

Kundai and Kudzai were very good friends. They used to share equally whatever
they had. One day Ben lied to Kundai that Kudzai stole some crayons from his bag
because he wanted to destroy their friendship. However, Lois took the crayons
from Ben and returned them to Kundai. Kundai and Kudzai had already fought.
After discovering what had happened, they asked each other for forgiveness and
became friends again.

There are many reasons for conflict with friends. Some are listed below.
° Different values

° Being jealous

° Failing to communicate well

° Lack of trust

° Competition for resources

Sometimes personal qualities destroy friendships. Qualities like being greedy, rude
and laziness may destroy relationships.

Activity 2
1. In groups, discuss how friendship is broken at school.
2. Write a poem for a friend.



--- Page 93 ---
Exercise 1

and were best of friends.
A. Kundai and Kudzai 8B. Kudzai and Lois C. Kundai and Ben
. Who lied to Kundai?
A. Lois B. Kudzai C. Ben
stole the crayons.
helped Kundai and Kudzai.
can cause conflict between friends.

There are many ways of managing a conflict. One of the ways is communication.
People who are at conflict have to talk to each other about their problems. If the
two cannot solve their conflict a third person is asked to come and help them
to resolve the conflict. Trusting each other is another way of managing conflict.
Conflict management is coming up with ways to solve the problem between
people or groups.

Activity 3

1. In groups, list ways of managing conflict.
2. Discuss ways of managing conflict as a class.



--- Page 94 ---
Summary

° Conflict occurs when people have a disagreement.
¢ One way of managing conflict is communication.
e — Trust can help people to avoid conflict.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

A cause of conflict is

A. _ trust . communication

C. sharing of resources . respect

We should each other.

A. forgive . _ fight

C. ignore ._ kill

How do you deal with conflict?

A. communicate . beat each other

C. runaway . become angry and fight

Which of the following is a sin?

A. stealing . drinking

C. eating . talking to friends

Conflict occurs when people

A. disagree B. love each other

C. run from each other D. hide from each other

A bad habit is .

A. reading B. walking

C. lying D. hugging

If you have done wrong, you get peace by

A. apologising B. running

C. laughing D. going away

People who are at conflict should their problems.

A. talk about B. ignore

C. run from D. protect

Another cause of conflict is

A. helping each other B. trusting each other

C. calling each other D. introduction of new family members
10, All these can cause conflict except

A. different values B. being jealous

C. lack of trust D. respect for other people

[10 marks]



--- Page 95 ---
Glossary

Disagreements - a clash between people's opinions, actions or
characters.

Jealous feeling envy of what another person has or can
do.



--- Page 96 ---
Unit 12 National value system

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. explain why it is important to respect self and others
2. identify characteristics associated with respect.

Background

Zimbabwe is made up of many different people. We all should respect one
another. We all should love our country.

Pp Key words
d self-respect empathy patriotism tolerance

12A. Respect



--- Page 97 ---
If you remember, in Unit 10 we discussed the importance of respecting one another.
It is important for all people to have respect for each other. As Zimbabweans, we
can show respect in many ways. Some of them are discussed below.

a) Tolerance

Tolerance is being able to accept others who are different from us. We are different
in so many ways. For example, we follow different religions and we like different
things. When there is tolerance we are able to accept one another with all our
differences.

b) Patriotism

My name is Ropafadzo. | am
a soldier in Zimbabwe. My
parents fought in the liberation
struggle. Their stories gave me
the strength to train and be a
soldier. | have gone for duties
around Zimbabwe to protect
my country. Even in other
countries | go as a peacekeeper.
Soldiers sometimes go to war, it
is part of the work. Now | can
share my stories with my parents
about how we love and protect
our country. It is everyone’s duty
to love and protect their country.
Loving your country is called
patriotism.

c) Empathy

It is also important to have empathy. Empathy is when you can share and
understand what another person is feeling. If someone is sad, you can understand
why they are sad and share in their sadness. Having empathy helps people to
avoid conflicts. It also allows us to help one another.

d) Self-respect

We need to have self-respect. Self-resoect is when you show care for your own
self. It is when you value your beliefs and your feelings. What a person does shows if
he or she has self-respect. A person with self- respect will do positive things. Having
self-resoect makes a person happy. It makes you take good care of yourself. It is
also important because other people can only respect you if you respect yourself
first. However, it is still important to respect other people.


--- Page 98 ---
Activity 1

In groups, make a list of the ways in which you are different. Make another list of
showing tolerance for each of the ways in which you are different. Present your
lists to the class.

Exercise 1

When we are able to accept others who are different from us we
have

Being able to share and understand what another person is feeling shows
you have

Who has the duty to love and protect the country?

When you have self-respect it is not important to respect other people. True
or false?

Who should respect you first before others can do so?

Summary

° Zimbabwe is a family where different people are found.
° We should learn to respect and love one another.
° It is everyone's duty to protect their country.

End of unit assessment test

It is important for people to have for each other.
A. hatred B. anger

C. disrespect D. respect

We should others who are different from us.

A. accept B. beat

C. laugh at D. steal from
—_ brings about peace in the world.

A. Hate B. Respect

C. Anger D. People

Having empathy —_.

A. _ is foolish B. is for parents only
C. allows us to help one another D. _ is not important
Defending one’s country is __.
A. madness B.

C. nothing D. patriotism

cowardice



--- Page 99 ---
People who fight for a country are called —___.
A. farmers B. soldiers
C. governments D. citizens
Besides soldiers, ____ help to keep peace in the country.
A. teachers B. people
C. police D. government
We share the world, therefore, we should —___ each other.
A. love B. fight
Cc. hate D. kill
Who has a duty to love our country?
A. parents B. _soliders
C. everyone D. police
10, ____ is when you show care for your own self.
A. Patritotism B. Self-respect
C. Tolerance D. Empathy

Glossary

Liberation setting someone free from imprisonment.



--- Page 100 ---
Unit 13 Religion on technology and enterprise

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. state religious artefacts
2. identify the technology used in religion.

Background

Everybody belongs to a religion and in their religion they use various forms of
technology. Children have used technology like mobile phones, televisions and
computers.

Key words
oe artefacts technology

13A. Religious artefacts

Every religion has its special tool they use and value. These tools are called
artefacts. Religions use artefacts as a reminder of their faith. They reflect the beliefs
of each religion. Artefacts can be pictures and things carved from wood or stones
to symbolise religion. Religions use artefacts as a form of identity.

Religion Artefact

Christianity

Indigenous Religion



--- Page 101 ---
Judaism

Activity 1

1. Bring some artefacts from your religion to class. Tell the class why the artefact
is important in your religion.

13B. Religion and technology



--- Page 102 ---
Long ago most of the religions in the world used their own books in hard copy
like the Koran or Bible. Since the advent of technology it is no longer necessary
to carry bibles. Technology are devices developed from knowledge for practical
purposes. Holy books are now found in mobile phones and other gadgets. People
can now use cell phones, computers and tablets to read anything on religion.
Televisions and radios are also used to share religion and some of the teachings
are spread through these gadgets. Technology makes it easy to talk to many
people at one time. It also makes it possible to address people in different areas
at one time.

Activity 2

1. In groups, talk about the technology used in your religion.
2. Draw one form of technology.

Exercise 1

People now have recordings of their sacred books in .

Technology makes it possible to reach people in different places at one
time. (True/False)

Give three forms of technology that can be used to share religious teachings?
Holy books are now found in and other .

Summary

° Artefacts are viewed as holy by believers.
° Everyone belongs to a religion.

° Religions use various forms of technology.

Artefacts reflect the beliefs of each religion.

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

—— is a wrong thing to do.
A. Forgiving one another B. Telling the truth
C. Respecting one another D. Being unkind

Being ——~ is a right thing to do.
A. disrespectful . unforgiving
C. kind . unhelpful



--- Page 103 ---
——_ is a sign of good morals.
A. Stealing B. Throwing rubbish on the ground
C. Beating others D. Being polite
Everyone has a right to choose —___.
A. brothers and sisters B. the people they want fo live with
C. parents D. areligion
—_—. does not show respect for them.
A. Treating others as equals B. Caring for others
C. Helping others D. Stealing from others
If you respect others they will __.
A. think you are a fool B. laugh at you
C. respect you too D. ignore you
We should always —__ one another.
A. respect B. fight
Cc. kill D. hate
When there is a conflict people should —_.
A. _ fight B. ignore one another
C. kill one another D. talktoeachother about their problems
What are special objects for each religion called?
A. phones B. computers
C. artefacts D. holy books
Who should love their country?
A. Soldiers only B. Children only
C. Everyone D. Parents only.
. Patriotism is __.
A. loving your country
B. accepting others that are different from you
C. understanding what others are feeling
D. showing care for your own feelings.
. What do the countries have to help people respect one another?
A. Rules and laws B. Prisons
C. Holy books D. Religious artefacts

Structured questions

You get punished if you do something —_.

—_— help us to choose between what is right or wrong.
A person has a right to choose —__. (parents/a religion)
If you respect others they will ___.

Who should be treated with fairness?



--- Page 104 ---
Glossary

Computers an electronic device that is used to store and sort
information and work with data at a high speed.

Gadgets a small mechanical device or tool.
Microphones instruments used for increasing the volume of a
person’s voice, especially with a lot of people.



--- Page 105 ---
Religion and health

Introduction

Religions have different steps they take to promote health and people's wellbeing.
Different religions are aware of child abuse and make sure they educate children
and their parents on the different forms of child sexual abuse. Religions also
educate people about diseases such as HIV and AIDS. They do this so as to

promote healthy living.


--- Page 106 ---
Unit 14 Religion and abuse

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:

1. identify forms of sexual abuse

2. identify potential perpetrators of child sexual abuse
3. suggest religious solutions to child sexual abuse.

Background

Sexual abuse is now very common at home, school and religious gatherings.
Children are targets of sexual abuse in different places. One should know about
abuse and where to go if it happens.

Fe Keywords
minor sexual abuse perpetrators healthy living

14A. Religion, forms of sexual abuse and perpetrators

a) Forms of child sexual abuse

When someone harms a minor sexually, the act or crime is known as sexual abuse.

A minor is anyone below the age of eighteen. There are different forms or types of

child sexual abuse. These include:

* exposing one's self to a minor

° fondling or touching a minor’s private parts

° forcing a child to touch one’s private parts

° producing, showing or sharing pictures or movies of naked people with
children

° sexual intercourse of any kind with a child.

Activity 1

1. Research about the forms of sexual abuse.
2. Present what you have found out to the class.



--- Page 107 ---
b) Potential perpetrators of child sexual abuse

Sexual abuse can happen to both males and females. Anyone can be a perpetrator
of child sexual abuse. A perpetrator is someone who commits an illegal act;
someone who breaks the law. Abusers or perpetrators gain children’s trust first.
Children can be abused by anyone, families, friends, church members, and their
parents. Usually children are sexually abused by people they know. These can be
people they have grown to love, obey and respect.

c) Religious solutions to child abuse

Most religions teach children about sexual abuse and how to handle it. Different
religions should encourage children to speak out and also counsel those that have
been abused. Churches in Zimbabwe hold workshops to educate children and
their parents about child sexual abuse. They teach them about how to see and
deal with it. Churches also encourage children and their parents to report acts of
sexual abuse to the police. In the Islamic religion, children are educated about
sexual abuse. They are taught how the perpetrator or abuser gets close to them.
The Islamic religion also encourages parents to believe their children when they
say they have been abused. Children are taught to speak out when they have
been sexually abused. Religions also counsel children that have been sexually
abused.


--- Page 108 ---
Activity 2

1. Using the internet, find out about the potential perpetrators of child sexual
abuse. Write down what you have found and present to the class.
2. In pairs, discuss what you see in the picture on page 101.

Exercise 1

What is sexual abuse?
Touching a minor's private parts is not a form of sexual abuse. (True/False)

What is a perpetrator?

A is anyone below the age of eighteen.

Churches in Zimbabwe hold to educate children and their parents
about child sexual abuse.

Project

Come up with posters on sexual abuse for display at your school. Ask for
permission to stick your posters around the school and in your community.

Summary

° Anyone can abuse children.

° Sexual abusers first gain a child's trust.

° Usually, children are abused by people they know and trust.
° Religions should educate children about sexual abuse.

Churches in Zimbabwe hold workshops to teach children about sexual abuse.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

A minor is anyone below the age of .
A. 10
Cc. 18

is a form of sexual abuse.

A. Starvation . Touching a child’s private parts
C. Beating . Neglect
can abuse children.
A. Dogs . Anyone
C. Belts . Limbabwe



--- Page 109 ---
Abusers gain first.
A. _ trust B. money
C. nothing D. food
Children are often abused by people to them.
A. strange B. known
C. foreign D. elderly
What should children do when they have been sexually abused?
A. speak out B. keep quite
C. runaway D. hate themselves
What should churches do to help children that have been abused?
A. Chase them away B. Beat them
C. Counsel them D. Tell them to beat up others
— should teach children how to handle abuse.
A. Parents B. Schools
C. Society D. Everyone
Fondling a child's private parts is ___.
A. sexual abuse B. being poor
C. ignorance D. neglect
. The lslamic religion parents to believe their children when they say they
have been abused.
A. neglect B. shows
C. encourages D. forces

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
What is sexual abuse?
List two religious solutions to sexual abuse.
What is a perpetrator?
What do abusers gain first?
Forcing achild to watch movies with naked people is a form of sexual abuse.
[True/False]
[15 marks]

Glossary

Fondling stroking or caressing someone's private parts.

Campaigns ameeting where a group of people discuss a certain
topic or issue.

Iilegal act is an act that is against the law.



--- Page 110 ---
Unit 15 Religion and gender

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. identify different sexes
2. identify gender roles.

Background

Every child belongs to a certain culture. The culture has set roles that each family
follows. Children know that each society has defined roles for each gender and
age. Gender is the state of being male or female.

Key words
gender culture

15A. Religion and gender roles

Gender roles are tasks done by men and women which are accepted by the
society. Our cultures usually define these roles. Culture is a word for people’s ‘way
of life’. Males/boys do the heavy work and females/girls care for the home and
children. In most cultures, the roles have not changed much. The females cook,
wash, weed, mind children and clean the home. The males cut trees, build homes,
plough, hunt and decide things at home. Nowadays both males and females do
whatever is needed to be done without waiting for a certain gender to perform
a certain role.

©


--- Page 111 ---
. Gender means either. or .
A. male or female B. male or boy C. female or girl
. Who decides on gender roles?
A. mother B. father C. culture
. List three roles of a girl at home.
Name two roles for boys.
males and females do whatever is needed to be done.

Summary
° Gender roles are tasks done by men and women which are accepted by
the society.

° In most cultures, there are roles specifically for males and females.
° Nowadays, males and females can do the same tasks.

©


--- Page 112 ---
10. Society has set

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Gender means either
A. male or female B. male or boy
C. female or girl D. one of the above
Who decides on gender roles?
A. mother B. father
C. culture D. community
is a word for people's ‘way of life’.
A. Gender B. Males
C. Culture D. Females
Nowadays both and do whatever is needed to be done without
waiting for a certain gender to perform a certain role.
A. males and females B. gender and culture
C. boys and men D. women and ladies
Who cooks and minds the children?
A. males B. females
C. boys D. children
Who hunts and decides things at home?
A. mother B. girls
C. females D. males
Gender roles are done by males and females.
A. tasks B. dances
C. books D. gender
Males/boys do the work.
A. easy B. proper
C. heavy D. little
Females/girls care for the and .
A. pots and pans B. home and children
C. garden and firewood D. crops and animals
for each gender.
A. roles B. money
C. gifts D. culture



--- Page 113 ---
Unit 16 Religion and sexuality

Objectives

By the end of the unit, you should be able to:
1. state the characteristics of a boy and a girl
2. identify religious practices on sexuality.

Background

Boys and girls are part of different religions. In those different religions, roles are
divided between them because of the different characteristics they have. Have
you ever heard about the differences between the characteristics of a boy and
that of a girl? Can you list the ones you know?

Key words
pf righteousness fragile slaughter

16A. Sex identification

Boys and girls differ in alot of ways. They differ in strength, emotions, size and build.
Talk about these differences with your friend and what you think about them. Use
the ones that are in the table below:

a) Characteristics of boys and girls

Unemotional Emotional

Willful Docile

Bigger Small and petite
Strong and tough-skinned Fragile
Dominant Submissive

Less compassionate Nurturing and compassionate
Competitive Less competitive



--- Page 114 ---
b) Religious practices and sex identification

Religious practises treat men and women differently. In Christianity, a man is seen
as the head of the family and a woman as the helper. In the Islamic religion, men
and women dress differently. Women cover their bodies from head to toe and are
expected to also cover their heads. This is done to shield them from western influence.
In Indigenous Religion, during ceremonies, men slaughter the animals and women
cook. During funerals and memorials, women are expected to wear headwraps
and cook the food. Men are considered the head of the family. Grandmothers,
mothers and married sisters are often treated with honour in family issues.

Activity 1

1. Find out about practices in different religions.
2. In groups, talk about the roles of boys and girls in different religions. You can
talk about: Islam, Christianity, Judaism and Indigenous Religion.

Exercise 1

Christianity believes men are the

Women wear during ceremonies.

Iskamic women cover their heads to .

What do girls do during ceremonies in Indigenous Religion?



--- Page 115 ---
End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

If men are unemotional, then women are

A. small B. submissive

C. emotional D. bigger

Boys and girls in a lot of ways.

A. are similar B. differ

C. believe D. willful

Indigenous Religion believes that boys are than girls.
A. weaker B.  crueller

C. stronger D. softer

During ceremonies in Indigenous Religion, who cooks the food?
A. Tom B. Father

C. Women D. The gardener

In Islamic Religion, men and women differently.

A. dance B. dress

Cc. eat D. clap

During ceremonies in Indigenous Religion, men animals
A. eat B. hunt

C. slaughter D. heard

According to Christianity, men are the

A. neck B. head

C. followers D. helpers

In Indigenous Religion, married sisters are often treated with
issues.

A. disrespect B. disgrace

C. dishonour D. honour
Girls/women are

A. bigger . unemotional

C. submissive . dominant

. Boys/men are

A. fragile . petite

C. docile . dominant

Structured questions

List 2 basic characteristics of girls/women.

List 2 basic characteristics of boys/men.

List any two duties that are for women in Indigenous Religion.
Religions treat men and women .

In Christianity takes the leadership role in the family.

in family



--- Page 116 ---
Unit 17 Religion, HIV and AIDS

Objectives

Y the end of the unit, you should be able to:
state the meaning of the abbreviations HIV and AIDS
list causes of HIV and AIDS
explain the myths and facts on HIV and AIDS
discuss the negative impact of stigmatization
disseminate information on HIV and AIDS.

Background

A number of people are living with AIDS. AIDS means Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome. It is caused by a virus called HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus].
One starts by being HIV positive then it progresses to AIDS. AIDS has no cure, it kills.
HIV is a virus that attacks the immune system. The Immune system is a body system
that protects the body from diseases. People with HIV can take antiretroviral
(ARV) therapy drugs and can live a healthy life. Worldwide the first of December
is specifically set aside to remember HIV and AIDS and this is shown by wearing a
red ribbon crossed over.

Key words

Ve Virus immune Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome [AIDS]
Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV]

17A. Causes of HIV and AIDS



--- Page 117 ---
HIV is a virus that affects the immune system. It is acquired by sharing sharp objects
like needles, razors, syringes and scissors with an infected person and also having
unprotected sex with an infected person. It is also passed through mother to child
when giving birth. Touching the blood of an infected person with naked hands if
you have an open wound can get you infected. Sometimes one is infected when
they are given blood at the hospital.

Activity 1

1. List sharp things used at home.
2. In groups, make posters about causes of HIV and AIDS.

Exercise 1

. HIVisa . A. fruit B. value C. virus
. List three sharp objects that can spread HIV.

. What does HIV stand for?

. When handling an injured person, one should use .

. What does AIDS stand for?

17B. Religious attitudes towards HIV and AIDS

The facts about HIV and AIDS divide people into two groups. The groups are those
with positive attitudes and those with negative attitudes. In Indigenous Religion,
some people believe that it is witchcraft or spirits. There are myths and beliefs
on curing the pandemic and these often result in infecting more people. These
people often ignore the lesson on HIV and AIDS. Christians believe God can heal
all diseases. However, some of them take ARVs and encourage their use. In the
Islamic religion, HIV and AIDS is seen as more of a product of sinful behavior. Some
people in Judaism also link AIDS with bad sexual activity. However, some people
in all the different religions have been educated on it and now take ARVs.

Activity 2
1. In groups, discuss how the people in your community react to HIV and AIDS.
2. Make HIV and AIDS awareness posters. You can use computers if you have
them.

Exercise 2

1. People are divided into positive and attitudes about HIV and AIDS.
A. negative B. positive C. ignorant



--- Page 118 ---
. Which religion believes AIDS is caused by witchcraft?
A. christianity B. Islam C. Indigenous Religion
Is AIDS curable?

Christians believe can heal HIV.

Some religions believe HIV and AIDS is caused by bad

arw

activity.

17C. Awareness on HIV and AIDS

HIV
a

The government and the rest of the world take time to educate people about
HIV and AIDS. There is no time to gather people in classes. A group of people
are sent into communities to teach everyone in their homes. Some groups
have meetings and share knowledge about HIV and AIDS. Children and
grown-ups are also taught about HIV and AIDS. They are taught about being
tested, care and treatment and how to care for infected people.

1. In groups, dramatise groups of people teaching about HIV and AIDS.
2. List the things they can do for one who is ill.



--- Page 119 ---
Exercise 3

. The ___ educates people on HIV and AIDS
A. teacher B. pastor C. government
. Who is sent in the communities?

A. agroup of people B. agroup of soldiers C. agroup of pastors
. Is HIV and AIDS taught at your school?
. Forone to know if they are HIV positive or negative, they should be first.
. People with HIV and AIDS need .

Summary

e Gender roles are tasks done by men and women at home which are
accepted by the society.

Children adopt either a male or female gender identity.

HIV is a virus that attacks the immune system.

HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus.

AIDS stands for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Does AIDS have a cure?

A. yes B. no

C. sometimes D. itcan be used
AIDS stands for Acquired Immunodeficiency .

A. Syndrome B. Virus

C. System D. Solution

What is HIV?

A. A fruit B. Aparasite

C. Avirus D. Avalue

When handling an injured person, one should use ;
A. paper B. gloves

C. stick D. nothing

When one has HIV, it is said they are .

A. positive B. negative

C. living D. nothing
Tablets taken for HIV are called .

A. paracetamol B. aspirin

C. anti-retrovirals D. cafemol



--- Page 120 ---
7. HIV affects the ___ system.
A. breathing B. immune
C. eating D. brain
8. People are divided into positive and attitudes about HIV and AIDS.
A. negative B. positive
C. ignorant D. active.

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.
State two causes of HIV and AIDS.
When is HIV and AIDS remembered in the world?
List three sharp objects that can spread HIV.
What help can be given to people living with HIV and AIDS?
For one to know if they are HIV positive or negative, they should be first.

Glossary

Cure treatment that relieves symptoms of a disease or condition.

Infect to cause someone or something to become sick or
affected by a disease.

Pandemic an outbreak of a disease world wide or in a country.

Consequence a bad result or outcome.



--- Page 121 ---
Unit 18 Healthy living

Objectives

Y the end of the unit, you should be able to:
name body parts
explain ways of taking care of various body parts
explain the need for exercise and rest
discuss healthy eating habits
list good eating habits.

Background

Everyone wants a healthy body. Healthy living comes from the food we eat,
exercises and keeping clean. Exercise is an activity done to keep the body or
mind strong.

Key words

healthy habits exercise

18A. Personal hygiene



--- Page 122 ---
Everyone needs to be clean. You can make a lot of friends when you are clean.
A child should bath everyday using soap and a towel or a stone to clean the
dirt away. Brush your teeth after every meal with a toothbrush, tooth paste or
stick. Hair should be kept clean everyday. School uniforms and clothes should be
washed and ironed. When bathing, clean your nose, behind the ears, your back
and scrub your feet.

Activity 1

1. Name body parts and explain ways of taking care of them.
2. Take turns to mime, brushing teeth, combing hair, bathing and ironing.

Exercise 1

. When are you supposed to brush your teeth?
. Clothes should be and

. What do you use to brush your teeth?

. We should keep hair everyday.

. Achild should both .

18B. Healthy habits

Exercise and sleep are healthy habits. Healthy habits are daily acts that benefit
one’s physical or mental health. Exercising helps people lose weight and lower
the risk of some diseases. There are different exercises that children can do. These
can be playing ball, running, puzzles, skipping rope and other different games.
Children spend their days at school, busy with school work and sports. Affer such
days they need to get home and rest. Sleeping is a form of resting. Resting relaxes
the body and the brain. Exercising and resting helps the body and brain to grow

and be healthy.


--- Page 123 ---
1. In pairs, talk about the exercises you do at home.
2. In groups, find out interesting exercises you can try out.

Exercise 2

What are the advantages of exercising?

Name two types of exercises.

Resting relaxes the body and the brain. [True/False]
is a form of resting.

What are healthy habits?

18C. Healthy eating habits

Healthy eating habits are important skills that everyone should develop. During
meal times there are certain manners that should be observed and these are:
washing hands before eating
eating with mouth closed
eating food when its warm not hot
sweeping scraps of food that fall while eating
washing hands after eating.
is always polite to say thank you after a meal.

=>


--- Page 124 ---
Activity 3

1. In groups, talk about what you do at home before eating.
2. Draw your favourite food.

Exercise 3

. Wash before eating.
A. face B. feet
. Talking while eating is .
. itis always to say thank you after a meal.
. Why do we sweep the area after eating?
. Which skill is to be developed by everyone?

Summary

° Everyone needs to bath.
° Healthy living entails eating food exercising and being clean.
° Exercising and resting are healthy habits.

End of unit assessment test

Multiple choice questions

is a form of resting.
A. Eating . Sleeping
C. Running . Dancing
Exercising and sleep are
A. healthy habits . tasks
C. resting habits . deeds
relaxes the body.
A. Resting . Dancing
C. Running . Jumping
is a form of exercise.
A. Napping . Sleeping
C. Running . Sitting
Exercise is good for your .
A. hair B. teeth
C. hands D. health
Healthy food leads to a healthy ___.
A. body B. clothes
C. food D. head



--- Page 125 ---
7. How many times should one brush teeth?

A. once B. inthe morning
C. after every meal D. twice
8. Cover your mouth when
A. talking B. sneezing
C. laughing D. sleeping
9. Eating very hot food causes the mouth to
A. itch B. bend
C. smell D. grow
10. After eating we should the cook.
A. scold B. thank
C. beat D. ignore

Structured questions

Answer all questions below.

l. is a form of resting.
. What are healthy habits?
. Exercise is good for your
relaxes the body.
. Clothes should be
. Hair should be kept
. Talking while eating is
Why do we sweep the area after eating.
and are good healthy habits.
hands before and after eating.

and .
everyday.

-

vaNTa9Q0Ta

[20 marks]

Glossary

Hygiene the things that you do to keep yourself and
surroundings clean in order to maitain good health

Germs Tiny living things that cause diseases in plants or
animals.



--- Page 126 ---
End of term three assessment

Multiple choice question

At a funeral, people the dead.
A. mourn B. laugh
C. gossip at D. look at
It is easy in life if we each other.
A. hunt B. hate
C. love D. ignore
A person who cannot be trusted.
A. sings B. prays
Cc. lies D. dances
One of the tasks of a father is to
A. beat children B. provide for the family
C. marry many wives D. disappear
A minor is anyone below the age of
A. 13 B. 18
C. 10 D. 12
is a form of sexual abuse.
A. Starvation B. Fondling a child’s private parts
C. Beating D. Neglect
We should always our parents.
A. hate B. obey
C. laugh at D. ignore
All elders should be
A. respected , B. hated
C. mocked D. beaten
Tablets taken when one is HIV positive are
A. paracetamol B. — disprin
C. ARVs D. cafemol
Religions teach children about
A. sexual abuse B. lie
C. death D. steal
is a sin.
A. Eating B. Stealing
C. Laughing D. Having friends
Every person needs fo live in a ____ place.
A. safe B. harmful
C. dirty D. bad
is good for your body.
A. Exercise B. Smoking
C. Drinking D. Eat too much



--- Page 127 ---
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

those who break the law.

The country has rules to

A. kill B. kick

C. punish D. ignore

It is polite to elders.

A. greet B. shout at

C. laugh at D. lie to

A person who cannot walk is

A. blind B. physically handicapped
C. deaf D. dumb
Every person has a right to choose their .

A. religion B. family

C. race D. clothes
Who should take care of animals?

A. animals B. noone

C. people D. children
When you have done wrong, you should

A. apologise B. laugh

C. ignore D. keep quiet
Which form of technology is used wrongly?

A. holy books B. mobile phones
C. radios D. television
Religious artefacts are special objects for .

A. religion B. maths

C. agriculture D. thekitchen
When handling the blood of an HIV infected person we use
A. blankets B. gloves

C. raincoat D. glasses

To keep healthy one should always

A. exercise B. lie

C. fight D. steal

A good child knows what is right or .

A. wrong B. lie

C. cheap D. steal

A person who cannot hear is

A. lame B. blind

C. deaf D. dumb



--- Page 128 ---
Structured questions

Answer question one and any two other questions
Read and answer questions that follow.

Chinhoyi is a farming area. The farms have thick and long elephant grass. During
the dry hot season veld fires are very common. At farm 236, Alexander and
Alexio were making a fireguard. Suddenly, they saw smoke and flames from
their neighbour's farm number 235. Alexander ran to the homestead to alert the
owners. Alexio ran to slash the grass down dividing the farms. This was to get a
chance to put out the fire. No houses were burnt and the fire was stopped.
1. a. Where did Alexio and Alexander live?
. Why did they need a fireguard?
Love your as you love yourself.
If you were people at farm 235, what would you have done for the boys?
A person has a right to choose a
Exercise and sleep are heathy .
If you do wrong you get .
When we live together well, we are at .
If you have done wrong, it is wise to
. Special objects for religion are called
Defending one country is called ‘
All over the world people belong to different .
are often abused.
is a form of resting.
. The HIV virus attacks the system.
. Ahealthy mind is a healthy .

a
b
Cc.
d.

. a.
b.
Cc.
d.

. a.
b
Cc.
d.

. a.
b.
Cc
d



