--- Page 1 ---
lum

rricu

BA| college press

Ventures Primary

Heritage-Social Studies

New Cu



--- Page 2 ---
er:
:

Topic 1

Topic 2

Topic 3

Topic 4

Topic 5

Topic 6

é LJ

Identity: Family history and local heritage .........sscereere fenneseeceneerseenes 1
Types Of FOMTIIES 0... ees esccceseecsesseeeseenenenesesnenensarensecneneantnenenenterancesasansnenses 2
Family ANd SULOUNGING COMMUNITY ..-secseceeeseenecseesecsseseceneeseenennenseesntss 3
HUNG MIGATION ...eeeseecssesesesestcasessssssenteansnenesnnenearesaeeranenananspanenseaeseesneses 5
Conflict management at family, school and community level w...... 8
Languages and Cultures im ZIMDADWE .,.....sesseesteterenestetesssesresenenenennenens 13
End of topic ASSeSsMEeNt FEST ......esesecseseseereeseseseseneasenssensatenenensscerseanenreces 15
Cultural Heritage .....c.csseeecescessesseseeeseneeeeersteeeeeneeenenestaneanessenanerseesnassanseanens 18
Rites of passage for DOYS AN GIrls ........ssessesesesesnsereeteteentateeeeseenseenens 19
COURSHID ...ccecececnsessesesesscsssescteccenesesnescnenseeeeesecnsnsnmnsacarsusucnaneensanesasenerensnssnnes 22
INGIQENOUS MATIAGE CUSTOMS. ...essrereecrnerrercseenessressntsenseneneseennetnesesceesenssss 25
Marriage: Civil ANd CUSTOMATY ......1. eects aecveveseesecseeusereraeeeeee sevecearersees 26
ENd Of topic ASSESSMENT TEST ...sseeceeereeeerseetesenreeeasnnnessenes Saas wean CTea ce sheotes 28
National history, sovereignty ANd GOVETNANCE o....escesessescensrverserenennes 30
The pre-Colonial KINQOMMS .........eeeeeessesesssesseeesnenenenestenenenencensenssenseenenserses 31
Effects of first Contact With EULOPEONS ........ seer eeecersnseetecneetssteetsaaeeensees 32
Development Of INGIGEMOUS IOWS ..........seseeseresesseeeneneeneneneneneneenenenereenenen® 33
LOCA GOVEFNMENT ees seescsssessseseeeseetneeesesencsessnsserereneerennerteserstsensanaeagaeents 35
End of topic assessment TeSt ......sceceeeeeccesesrseensnenecsisaeaesensseseenssenanantennens 36
End of term ONE ASSESSMENT TEST... sceresceeeseeeeeteceensteneneeneeneeeeteatenerees 38
Entitlements/Rights and respONsiDIlities ........cccseeenereesnreenenrtessenenseennens 43
Entitlements/Rights and responsibilities Of ThE CHIC 1... eee 44
CiTIZENSHIP. ....eeeeeeeeceeeseetecssessessseeseseeeanseseatucsenesaecesssnesenensnanenacacsananseneners ics 46
Rights and responsibilities of a citizen in ZIMDO DWE 0. eeceeeceeeeseeeeeeee 47
Abuse of children, WOMEN ON MEN ...e..ccseesceseseeeseeseeeteseeeeesenenesnenneerenes 49
Gender based Protection ......eccsesesseceeceseeseeresseeeesneseeneenenarretenneentearess 50
Role Of the PONCE FOFCE .....seeseecesseeenereserenenstesesessstaenenenasesaneseseeneneneasnanes 53
End of topic ASSESSMENt FEST ..---.-cceererseesessseeeseseeeeeeeeeenereeneresesenensnenenenes 54
SHEMET ooo. esscceeseesceseeressevensscceccineenenensuoeeneneeesereneees dccenereversequsrenres fesse perce 96
Shelter and heritage sites ...... wccoesesecsenensesiupoiiaiecsoadestibsareebnonssseasievseanssene 56
Health and safety in shelter GESIQNS .........seessreeseseeeeneeees seetaceseeeeserses 6]
Special building designs in disaster prone COS .esccccscessersesssteseesseessies 6]
End of topic assessment test... cccsesseseessesteeseestessenseeeeseeeeen essen encannens 63
Social services AN VOIUNTCETISM coccsecescccrestestessetserneennereestnecanenerenennasars 65
Prominent people and organisations involved in voluntary

work in the past and present at local and national IOVEL ceeeceeeeeneeees 65
Local voluntary organisations that empower the vulnerable and
CISQAVONTAQE, ....seseccesessesesesseseeneseenensersseecentaraneaseneseteenensanenseneaaesensnsnstnats 70

End of topic OSSESSITIENT COST cecccscsccesseecsessescsesccesseseseeeneeeeneeeees souepsccsvonesss 72

a



--- Page 3 ---
Topic 7

Topic 8

Topic 9

Topic 10

Natural heritage: Production, distribution and consumption of goods and
: 74

SOTVICES ..ececccesesscseecescecceseesnseauscecesnsnrenserssnarensnnensee? Se Saebiansaceserbswasicopoeseronse

PrOGUCTIVE SECTOFS IN ZIMDADWE «....-.-cscserereestsesterststseeeteenteanenenaneereneenenes 74
Budget Income ExPENCITULE ..-...--sscersrserseescssrsnseterrennnnnessersenanartnencnnnsses 79
BOINKING ..esscessesessnesesssssvesscencescenecnsrsccacnecnvenennenerensenensnenacanancnnennanssesstegeteess 8]
End Of topic ASSESSMENT TESt ....-ssescceesssessesesseseecenecsetestestsnsrenneenentennsesttes 82
End of term TWO ASSESSMENT TOSt «0... eeeeeeereretenennertsesenteneneanenteneeseneeten 84
Transport and COMMUNICATION ........-secnssrseesseseessretenecntserentensencenennennennet® 89
Development of transport and COMMUNICATION ......ereeceeeteesreeenreteteees 90
Transportation Of GOOS ...e.ssesisseesecsessesserteetssterteneensenennenrasstssenseseeneeseesets 92
Responsible use of COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS. .....cccseeeesecrereesesnertentenesers 96
End of topic assessment test ...---secsssessssesessssessnecsnntescnssrsnnanennansnnnssseesse 98
Work GMd leisure ...c.csescescscessseseeeceeesssesceseesncsssenseannenansunersssensnenananaenessentes 100
Employment creation in ZimMDADWe ......ssssensssssernstenrecntersesetecennenearenncen 100
Work and leisure in the past GN PreseMt .......cesseecsererererssteneeneettntescess 103
Responsible Use Of leisure TIME .......-eecssceseereesteseesstnneetsensentenesencnsetecentens 106
End Of topic ASSESSMENT TEST ....-seececcecsecsessesseenersensserersranensennenscnncescensnettes 107
Global iSSUCS ....cessscsesesscesessesessececssensescenenserssnerenennenearnasensenassanersanenessrenanens 110
POVEMTY eccescecsessesesssssetecsesscsnenesneenssnencescsenacancoeassnstesstscananenasascarcesesenensseeees 110
HIV CNC AIDS c.cccescscecsscecceecseereecesesneceesesesessnssssenssenceasnassnnenseraenanensegessessenens 112
POIUTIOM .escscsceseceseesesessesecsceessebensnsssenegesseansneessansnrsrcncanensnstacisanansasonsnstscess 114
End of topic ASSESSMENT TEST... reeesererereeretereseseernseneecenstenrannscecserenenens 117

Endl of year Assessment TESt ....sssessesovesseeeneerneenessssenecanennecnnenenenssenstesseees® 119



--- Page 4 ---
Identity: Family history and local heritage

Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:

identify responsibilities of parents and children

identify roles of the family in the community

state the institutions in your community

explain human migration

list reasons for migration

describe effects of migration

identify solutions to migration

define conflict

identify the causes and effects of conflict at home, school and community

0. describe various ways of solving conflicts athome, inschooland at community
level

11. identify languages spoken in Zimbabwe

12. list various cultural practices found in Zimbabwe.

=O OnNankwh >

Flashback

Draw your family tree starting with your grandparents.
Answer these questions on relations

a) My mother's brother is my

b) Your father’s brother is your

c) Your mother's sister is your

d) Your father's father is your

e) My father's sister is my
aunt uncle cousin grandfather

™\ Key words
heritage role community culture

Introduction

in any community or society people live in family set ups. A community is a group
of people living together in a place. Everyone is a member of a family. One is
known by the name of the family he or she comes from. We grow up to become



--- Page 5 ---
adults through family support and upbringing. A family is the basic social unit in aq
community set up. In this unit Wwe are going to look at different types of families,
roles of family members and all that affects family life.

TA. Types of families

Nuclear family One Parent/Single parent family

There ore different types of families, The different types of families include nuclear,
child headed and single parent. The nuclear family can be monogamous or
polygamous,

a) Nuclear family: it is made UP of two adults, who are husband and wife, and
their children.

(i) Monogamous family: it is made Up of a husband, wife and their children,

(ii) Polygamous family: it is made Up of a husband, two or more wives and
their children. In Indigenous Religion, a polygamous family is believed to
be a nuclear family. This is because all the children are from one husband
and they are called by the father's surname.

b) Child headed family: it is made UP of children. One of them takes the role of
Parent and looks after the other siblings. This family could be q result of parents
Passing away or parents living in the diaspora,

c) Single parent family: a single. parent family is made Up of one parent and
children. This family could be aresult of a divorce or death of a spouse,

Responsibilities of Parents and children

Parents: in nuciear monogamous, polygamous and single parent families, parents
have the role of taking care of their Children. They take care of all household
Expenses and maintain Peace in the house. Parents teach children values and
Pay for their education. In all four families, parents provide shelter food and
Clothing for the Children. Parents Provide protection, companionship and security.
They teach children how to behave and be of good value in the society.



--- Page 6 ---
Children: in nuclear, monogamous, polygamous and single parent families,
children are responsible for looking after their possessions. They should be able
to take care of their clothes, uniforms and books. This depends on their age. The
alder children help the parents take care of the young. They help clean the house
and wash clothes. It is also their responsibility to help their siblings with homework.
in a child headed family one child takes on the parent roles mentioned above.
Whereas the other children remain children and act like children, the responsible
one in the family provides for the other siblings.

Tell others about your family. Use these questions as you discuss your family:
a) Who are the members of your family?

b) Of yournames which one is your family name?
c) Whatis your totem?

In groups, talk about the different types of families.
Dramatise the different family types.

1B. Family and surrounding community

Cheneso's family

Cheneso is a grade 5 learner at Hande Primary School. She comes from Karimba
Village in ward 10, Buhera District. She is the last born in a family of six. Both her
parents are civil servants. Her father works at the registry’s offices at the nearest
growth point. Her mother is a teacher at the local school.

Mr Mhaka, Cheneso's father, is one of the village committee members of the
village head's advisor. Mrs Mhaka is the secretary of the burial society in that
community. Whenever meetings are held in the village. both Mr and Mrs Mhaka
attend.

In Cheneso's village, men are the heads of families and do all the work to support
iheir families. Women normally take care of children as well as their homes. Children
usually help their parents in their fields or cooperative gardens and any other work
at home. On school days children go to school.



--- Page 7 ---
}

<<

Cheneso at the community garden

The Mhakas grow their food crops in their fields. They also help grow vegetables
in the community Co-operative garden. All the family members work in the fields

the garden. All the families in the community help work at the community
garden. They do this to help the poor and also to sell to the Grain Marketing
board. The money is used to help orphans who stay at the community orphanage
and old people who Stay at the old people's home close to where the Mhakas
Stay. Everyone has a role to play in the community.

Roles of the family in the community
Below is a list of some of the family roles in the community.

° Promote peace

Work together with other community members
° Take part (volunteer) in community activities
° Keep the community safe and clean

° Help the needy

Institutions in the community
Below is a list of some of the institutions foundina comunity.

e School

° Clinic

e Hospital

e Church

° Registrar's offices

Town house or City hall



--- Page 8 ---
° Orphanage
° Old people's home

In pairs, discuss and list down roles of family membeis in the community.
Present your list in-class.

2. Communities have institutions like hospitals, orphanages, schools and banks.
Role play functions of institutions in a community setup.

Exercise 1

How many children are in Mr Mhaka's family?
What is the family totem of the Mhakas?
Write Mr Mhaka's duties in the home and in the community.

What are Mrs Mhaka's duties and responsibilities in the home and in the
community?
Write fwo of Cheneso and her siblings’ responsibilities at home and in the
community.

1C. Human migration

What is human migration?

Human migration is the movement of people from one place to another. It is
usually from one country to another or one continent to another. Human beings
migrate in search of greener pastures. This could be in search of a betterjob, better
living conditions or education. Migration also involves moving from one region to
another in search of better grazing land for animals. This was largely practised by
the early people who moved from place to place in search of greener pastures
for their livestock. The different types of migration are explained below.

Types of migration

* Internal migration: This is moving to a new home within an area or province.
This type happens within a country's borders. Families or individuals that move
from one town to another or one province to another are called infernal
immigrants.

* International migration: This is moving to a new home in a different country
or continent. People, families or individuals, who move from their home country
to a different country or continent are international immigrants and some
refugees. Immigrants are both legal and illegal. Legal immigrants are those
who move with permission from both countries. Illegal immigrants move
without permission. Refugees are those who cross borders because of fear of

harassment,



--- Page 9 ---
—

Causes of migration

There are pulland push factors of mi

gration. These are the causes of migration.

Pull factors are those things that attract someone to a place. Push factors are
those things that force people to leave their places of residence for other new
places. The following table shows push and pull factors of migration.

seeseeee#et# # @«

unemployment

poverty or poor living conditions
floods

outbreaks of diseases

deaths of relatives-or parents

civil wars

droughts

climate change

getting married, especially women
going to a higher institution of
learning

political violence

floods

unfenile land

eee #8 8 # @# 8 @

employment

better living standards
better health facilities
political

low crime rate

less risk of natural disasters
political security

fertile lands

better education
climate change
peace

of



--- Page 10 ---
. Study the two pictures in the previous page and then talk about them,
The following questions will help you discuss:
(a) Which area would you like to live'in? Give yourreasons for your choice.
(b) What might cause people to move from A to B? Support your answers

{c) Whatreally attracts people to area B?
A lot of people are moving from picture A. to picture B. List the push and pull
factors of migration as shown by the pictures.

Effects of migration

Migration has both negative and positive effects. The following are some effects
of migration:

« Some migrants bring in new ideas for development to the new area.

* There is growth of shanty settlements in cities and on the outskirts of major
cities.

* There are intermarriages of different cultures. For example, whites marry blacks
or marriages among various ethnic groups such as Ndebele, Sotho, Kalanga,
Venda as well as Shona.

¢ Squatters are found in many places which can cause outbreaks of diseases
because of the poor living conditions.

¢ Mixing of cultures and a development of new ones.

*  |llegal street vendors are found in corners of streets in towns

¢« Migration can cause educated people to go to other countries to find
better jobs and paid better salaries, this is called brain drain.

* Migration can lead to an increased crime rate in the country or area people
are migrating to.

* Migration can cause people to end up having two homes. At one time they
are at their old homes and at other times they are at their new homes. This is
the way most workers in Zimbabwe live. They have two homes, one in town
where they work and the other one at their rural homes where they grew
Up.

Solutions to migration

There are a lot of solutions to migration and some are growth points, resettlements,
job creation, industry developments and strict migration laws. Growth points help
people stay in one place near their rural homes. Resettling people helps them
have permanent homes and reduces migrations. Creating jobs in rural areas
where people live so that they donot leave their hames is another solution
to. migration.

Developing all areas so that people enjoy living in their local homes. Rural

areas can be developed through improving infrastructure like roads, hospitals,
schools as well as establishing industries. Such a move would greaily assist in

reducing rural — urban migration.



--- Page 11 ---
More employment opportunities in the home country can also help reduce
immigration from country to country. Better living standards, low crime rate and
better health facilities can all be solutions to migration. Strict migration laws and
visas can also help reduce migration and its negative effects.

Exercise 2

List three causes of migration.
State two types of migration.
Give three examples of the effects of migration.

Development of growth points might be a solution to migration. (True/False]
Pull factors .

A. chase people away

B. attract people to an area

C. relocate people

D. cause squatters

6. The following might be causes of migration except

drought

floods

poor living conditions

airports

nk WN =

OOP >

1D. Conflict management at family, school and community

Tye»

ay ohh

Se ee



--- Page 12 ---
ce
nd
iad

A conflict is a quarrel or a fight. Where there is conflict there is a disagreement
or opposition. A conflict could be an indication of problems. It can completely
destroy working relationships if itis allowed to continue, Not all types of conflict are
bad. At times it is good to disagree on certain issues.

Activity 4

In groups, talk about conflict.
]. Give two reasons why children fight:
a) athome
b) atschool
¢c) in the community
2. Explain two reasons that normally make people, especially elders, quarrel or
fight:
a) at home
b) at work places
3. In groups, dramatise a village court trying to resolve a conflict between two
families who had a dispute over stray animals destroying crops.

Causes of conflict at home

There are different reasons why people disagree or fight. The following could be
some causes of conflict at home.

* Differences in seeing things because of age differences between the young
and the old

Unfair treatment or favouritism of children in the home

Lack of transparency on some issues at home

Lack of information on how certain things go or being misinformed

Differing interests of different people in the home

Differing ideas or behaviours due to age and time

Unfair distribution of resources at home

Poor management and leadership styles

Poor communication or lack of communication in the home

Causes of conflict at school

Favouritism or unfair treatment by teachers
Lack of basic needs like textbooks
Wanting to be treated better than others
Bullying

Different interests

Theft of other learners’ stationery or food
Mistreating others



--- Page 13 ---
Causes of conflict in the community

e 2 e ehU°? e* ses

Effects of conflict at home, school or community level
Conflicts need to be resolved in one way or the other. If a conflict is not well

Different beliefs

Lack of basic needs

Disrespecting others

Mistreating others

Accusing others of things they did not do
Mistrust amongst community members
Lack of cooperation within members

resolved the following could be the effects.

a)

At home

Hatred may develop among family
members such that they end up not
seeing eye to eye or greeting each
other.

Strained relationships could develop in
family members.

Fights and quarrels could be the order of
the day and that could lead to deaths,
disability and destruction of property.
There could be unhappiness and
depression among family members,
People could be divided into small
social groups at home and end up not
working together.

There would be no order in the home
and this could lead to hooliganism and
bad behaviours among children.

There would be domestic violence and
child abuse.

At school

Fights and quarrels among friends.

May create lifelong feuds.

May lead to bullying.

Poor pass rate. Usually little learning at
the school because of the conflict.
No development.

Lots of divisions amongst the staff or the
learners.



--- Page 14 ---
No order in the school leading to indiscipline and truancy in pupils.

If the conflict is well managed then it could lead to new rules being set in the
school which could help improve school systems and development.
There could be changes in the school authorities or new leadership styles

will be established.

c) At community level

Quarrels and fights will hinder any
progress and there would be no
development of any sort in the
community.

Gang violence will be the order of the
day.

Armed conflict which could lead fo
deaths.

Could lead fo discrimination
between the two groups.

Violence could increase.

How fo resolve conflict at home

There are several ways people could
employ to resolve conflict. Below are
some ways people can use io resolve
conflicts.

People should hold discussions at
family levels.

There should be family meetings and
a call to the elders for interventions.
There is also need to call for
interventions from local leadership
like the village heads or chiefs.
There is also need to solve the
problems cooperatively.

People should learn to respect one
another.



--- Page 15 ---
How to resolve conflict at school
Below are ways that can be used
to resolve conflicts at school.

There is need for proper
communication.

Learners should report any form
of conflict they witness, especially
when it is physical or verbal.
Learners should not bully each
other. Instead, stand up for those
who are bullied.

Meetings should be held with
different groups of people in
the school to identify the source
of conflict.

There should be discussions on
how best fo handle issues. Ideas
should come from ail sides,
including the learners themselves.
There is need fo formulate new
policies and implement them
collectively.

There should be transparency and explanations in all areas in the school.
At times there is need for interventions by other schools or education

leadership.

Reporting procedures

There is no one way of reporting conflict as it happens at different levels. It is
important to know the levels so that you are able to report fo the right people and
at the right time. When there has been a serious conflict at home that messes up
with rights then the victim has to report to the police. For lighter conflicts between
siblings, if they cannot solve them then they have fo tell their parents. Married
couples or grown ups have to report to their elders and ask for a mediator. It all
depends on the seriousness of the conflict. If it is violent then the police have to be
involved. For conflicts at school, students should report matters to their immediate
teacher or teacher in charge. In the community, conflict is reported to the police.
This will help save lives and stop gang murders or violence.

Activity 5

In groups, discuss ‘and list other causes of conflict. Present your findings in

class.

Role play conflicts and ways of resolving them.

In pairs, come up with two poems, one that discusses conflict and the other
on ways of resolving conflicts.



--- Page 16 ---
Exercise 3

What is a conflict?
Write two causes of conflicts af:
a) school
b) home
One effect of conflict at home is
Favouritism in the home can cause
helps relationships in the school.
What are the two effects of conflict at community level?
Give two reporting procedures for conflict at school.
Give two things you can do when you see learners fighting at school.

1E. Languages and cultures in Zimbabwe

Languages

Makadini Dumela

Makadini Mholweni 4}

Mulibwanji =

Mholweni = ?

b=)
=
=:Lumela je = Bonjour mhoro = Zz.

EUOGUMES

Salibonani

z
>
pe)
Le)
ueuoattes

Bonjour

I
=
°
5
=
=
Dn

Indigenous Zimbabweans are of different ethnic groups and each group has its
own culture as well as its language. The languages are called by the ethnic group
names. Of recent, more indigenous languages have been recognised in the
country's constitution. Languages like Nambya, Venda, Tonga and Kalanga are
now examined at Grade seven level in Zimbabwe. There are sixteen recognised
local languages in Zimbabwe. These are Chewa, Chibarwe, English, Kalanga,
Khoisan, Nambya, Ndau, Ndebele, Shangani, Shona, Sotho, Tonga, Tswana,
Venda, Xhosa and sign language. All these languages are to be ireated and
respected equally.

It is the state's responsibility to promote and advance the use of all these
languages in Zimbabwe, including sign language. The government also promotes
the development of the different languages in Zimbabwe. There are also a number
of people in Zimbabwe who are in business and many other things. Therefore,



--- Page 17 ---
there are a number of foreign languages spoken by different groups of people. A
few examples of these are English, French, Indian, Portuguese and Chinese. There
are lot of other languages spoken in smaller circles.

Collect pictures of different races in Zimbabwe.

Group the following languages as foreign or indigenous.

French English Ndebele Nambya Venda Kalanga
Afrikaans Ndau Zulu Chinese Portuguese Manyika
Tonga Karanga Zezuru

Culture in Zimbabwe

Zimbabwe is a multi-cultural country. It is made up of people from different
ethnic groups, nationalities, religions and culture. Culture is the belief, behavior,
language and complete way of life of a particular group of people. Culture
includes customs, ceremonies, and works of art, inventions technology and
traditions. Various African cultural practices include mukwerera, kurova guva/
umbuyiso, Kupururudza muroora, nhimbef/ilima and many others. There are
elements of culture that can be borrowed from other groups of people. For
example, African Zimoabweans borrowed a number of practises from the English.
Some of the borrowed practises include religion, dressing, music, dance, as
well as eating habits. The different religions also practise different things that have
become a culture for the people. For example, Christians have a white wedding
for those who want to marry and they are joined before God. In indigenous culture,
when the groom pays lobola the ancestors are informed ina ceremony and then
the two can then live together as husband and wife.

. Find.out the different cultural practices of different ethnic groupsin Zimbabwe.

_ List cultural practices borrowed from the English by the Africans in
Zimbabwe.

. Ingroups, drarnatise various dances, practices and ceremonies of different
cultural groups in Zimbabwe.

Exercise 4

1. State two official languages in Zimbabwe.

2. Which ethnic group of people is found around Great Zimbabwe?

3. All Zimbabweans speak English. [True/False]

4. The religion practised by Africans before the coming of the Whites was __.



--- Page 18 ---
The rain making ceremony practised in Indi
A. Zunde ramambo/isiphala seNkosi

genous Religion is called :

Nhimbe/ilima
Jakwara
. Mukwerera/Hosana

B,
C
D

Summary

* There are different types of families. These are the nuclear, monogamous,
polygamous, child headed and single parent families.

* Families play different roles in the community. They help in the different
institutions like orphanages and community gardens.

* Families or individuals can migrate within their country or to other countries or
continents.

* There are two main types of migration, These are internal and international
migration. People can migrate due to a number of reasons, for example,
conflict.

* Conflict can cause abuse, death and hatred among families and in the
community. At school it can lead to low grades and bullying.

* There are a lot of ways of reporting conflict at home, school or the community.
One way is reporting to the police.

* Zimbabwe is a multi-lingual country. People in Zimbabwe speak different
languages and they are part of different cultures.

End of t

Multiple choice questions

Most Africans in Zimbabwe speak their at home.

A. English B. Ndebele

C. Chinese D. native or local language

In a one parent family there .

A, are many children B. is one child only

C. is one parent only D. are children only

A mukwerera/hosana rain making ceremony is done to

A. make people dance B. ask for rain from the gods

C. respect the chief D. gather people together and drink

When people move into a new country for new jobs the movement is called

A. emigration B. immigration
C. external migration D. internal migration
When children live alone and fend for themselves the type of family is a


--- Page 19 ---
6.

A. Sharing resources B. Isolating others

1]. In a polygamous family there

12. It is good for family members to work together to promote

Which one is the odd one oui?

A. nuclear family B. extended family
C.. single parent family D. child headed family

A religion which seems to have been accepted and is widely dominant in
the Zimbabwean culture is .

A. African Tradition Religion (ATR)

B. Christianity

C. Moslem

D. Hindu

When a group of people move back to where they came from we call
it

A. seasonal migration B. return migration

C. external migration D. internal migration

One effect of Whites' migration to Zimbabwe is seen in people's

A. dressing B. walking C. drinking D. talking

Squatters are effects of .

A. dirty B. migration C. land shortage D. hunger
is an example of good neighbourliness.

C. Squabbles all the time D. Gossip

A. are few children B. is more than one wife
C. is more than one man D. are no children

A. conflict B. indiscipline
C. development in the home D. problems in the home

Structured questions

a) Father is always the head of the family. [True/False]
6), Some families are child headed. [True/False]

(internal migration/external migration/immigration/pull factor)
Write down two effects of migration.
What two habits/cultures have been copied from the English by African
Zimbabweans?
a) What is conflict?
b) Write three causes of conflict:
i) athome
li) at work places
ili) at school.
c) Give two negative effects of conflict:
i) atschool
ii) athome
iii) in the community.



--- Page 20 ---
6. Write two diseases that can spread in a squatter camp.
7. Write two duties of:

a) a prefect at school
b) an aunt in a family
c) a village secretary.

‘Glossary

Community = agroup of people living together.
Culture - beliefs and values of a:group of peaple.

Family - basic unit in the community setup:

Heritage — thatwhich can be taken from the past or benefits passed on
fromthe past.

Role - duty or expected function or behaviour.

ae ,

—

mer . \
yo JAN ONS |

\ 42



--- Page 21 ---
| ee
}
l =

Cultural heritage

—

Topic

2

Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:
1. identify stages of human development from birth to adolescence
2. explain rites of passage for each stage

3. explain the role of courtship in marriage

4. describe indigenous and modern marriage practices
5

6

identify types of marriages
explain the significance of marriage certificates.

Flashback

Unjumble the following words:
thrib ecleasenodc erariagm

1, Explain to a friend some ceremonies and rituals practiced in Zimbabwe
during any of the above processes.

2. Dramatise, in groups, a scene of the birth rite of passage at home.

~o Key words

society infancy adolescence

introduction

People pass through different stages as they grow up. The different stages of
growth are celebrated in different ways within different communities. The different
celebrations that mark stages of growth or change in a person's life are called
rites of passage. These celebrations are a reflection of culture and way of life of
people. In this topic we willlook at different practices of rites of passage at
different stages of life and within different ethnic groups in Zimbabwe. We
will also look at courtship, indigenous marriage customs and civil and customary
marriages.



--- Page 22 ---
2A. Rites of passage for boys and girls

Mbuya/Gogo appiying herbs on a newborn baby

There are ceremonies and rituals performed to mark each stage of development
in ahuman being. The ceremonies or rituals are normally performed at the birth of
a new baby, at puberty and at marriage. In Zimbabwe each indigenous group
nas its own way of performing the different rituals at each stage of human
development.

Sith

“hen a child is born, there are certain activities that are done to the child
Gepending on the area where the parents reside or come from. In modern
Goys these ceremonies are not very clear as most mothers now give birth in
sospitals or clinics. In the Ndebele culture, the baby is washed and oiled. They use
mmx fat or wax from honey. The umbilical cord is cut with a piece of grass called
eagunga. Ash is put on the baby's cord and she/he is made to inhale smoke from
herds that are said to protect him/her from evil. In Ndau, ihe midwife (mbuya)
Selivers the baby. The midwife gets a lot of presents for the arrival of the baby.
This is a sign that the father will be wealthy from the brideprice. In Venda, when a
baby is born, the Makhadzi is the first to be informed. She is the one who later on
biesses the baby.

ih some Shona cultures, soon after birth a child is given some herbs (mushonga
wendongorongo) which help to clean his/her bowels. The baby is also given
chipande medicine. Babies should also be breastfed and have no solids before
*rey are six months old. Nowadays the baby has to go for immunisation at various



--- Page 23 ---
stages to help the child grow well. For example, the baby must be immunized
against diphtheria, polio, whooping cough, tuberculosis (TB), measles and tetanus.
These have to be taken seriously since they may cause death or handicap if they
are not followed properly, It is the right of every child to access good health and
to receive such treatment at this stage.

Activity 1

1. Tell others what happens at home when a baby is born.

2. Listen as a resource person explains some of the rites of passage of children
at infancy level.

Read Simphiwe's story

My mother gave birth to a baby girl at Nhiukano Village in Ngungumbane. No one
was allowed to enter the room where the baby was. The baby was not allowed to
leave the room until the umbilical cord had fallen off. The day the umbilical cord
dropped, grandmother took the baby out for the first time. The baby was to see
the sun for the first time. The fallen cord was buried near our bedroom so that the
baby would not forget where she comes from. The baby's washed clothes were
dried in the shade.

My family waited for a family ceremony to name the baby. Some of our relatives
gathered for the ceremony. All the people who attended the ceremony agreed
that she be named Thando. Thando was our aunt's name and people thought
that she resembled her. When grandmother announced the name there was a
celebration noise, clapping of hands, Ululating whistling and laughter. Everyone
was happy. Everyone thanked the Almighty for the gift to the family.

Exercise 1

Where does Simphiwe live?

What was the name of the new baby?

The baby was named after whom?

When was the baby taken out of the room?

Who else gives a baby its name besides the parents?

The Ndebele use to cut the baby's umbilical cord.
The Venda people first tell when a child is born.
In the Ndau culture, who helps deliver a baby?

ONAaaARWH >



--- Page 24 ---
Target: How sharp is your memory?
Make words using the boxed letters. Each word should have the letter ¥.

Research

Find out how different tribes in Zimbabwe celebrate the coming of a new born
Daby.

Most cultures consider the important transitions in life to be birth, the onset of
puberty, marriage and finally death. The changeshaveritualceremonies performed
$0. as fo mark the transition from one phase of life to another. In Zimbabwe, the
different tribes have different ceremonies for the adolescence rite of passage. For
example, girls are taken to the river early in the morning for virginity testing. They
go with elderly women or aunts, who will then explain to them about womanhood
and what is expected of them. This is usually done among the Ndebele. Boys are



--- Page 25 ---
taken to the mountain for their initiation Ceremony in the Tsonga, Xangaan and
other cultures. Boys are taught how to become men and how to treat their wives

when married. A lot of practices are done and they are also given herbs to make
them strong as men.

Changes in boys and girls at puberty

Changes in girls
he Le |: + Slor _

Rraprate ct,
DICOSTS STOM:F Op

———— —

Muscles grow larger

Skin becomes ollier and develops

Spofts/pimples.

‘Hairs start to grow on arms, Pubic hair grows around the vagina
legs, underarm and on male and under arms:
organs

eee Ge

Exercise 2

The gestation period for a human being is

Why is it important to immunize babies?

Give two changes that take place on boys during their puberty stage.
Why is it very important to abstain from sex before marriage?

A period reached by children between eleven and fifteen years is called

In Indigenous culture, takes girls to the river and tests them for
virginity.

2B. Courtship 7

Courtship is mainly preparation for marriage. It is a practice done when people
want to marry each other. Courtship is the process whereby in some cultures a boy
looks for a relative to send messages to the girl of his choice. The relative could
be an aunt, sister grandfather or grandmother. When the girl is willing she will start
to establish a relationship with the boy, through proper ways or channels. Among

the Ndebele ond other cultures, there is an exchange of love tokens between the }
two as a sign of their love,



--- Page 26 ---
Boy and girl exchanging tokens infront of the aunt

Courtship's main role is to build relations. It is done so that the couple who want to
marry can take time to get used to each other. During courtship, the couple meets
with some relatives from either side so as to get to know and build relationships
with family members before marriage. The people who play major roles in the
courtship of a couple are aunts and uncles. For example, amongst the Kalanga
the young man would tell his uncle (basekulu) and the girl her aunt (bamazi).
Amongst the Ndau, the young man meets with the aunt first before proposing to
the young woman. The aunt will then try to convince the young woman to accept
the man's proposal. To establish a relationship, in the Shona culture, the young
man and woman exchange tokens. In the Kalanga and Ndebele culture, the
young man gives the girl a token. This is done differently from one ethnic group to
the other.

Nof everyone who is courting gets married. At the end, one may decide they
do not want to get married anymore for some reason. Courtship is, therefore, a
period of deciding if you still want to be with that person or not. Courtship builds
and cements relationships. During this time, the aunts and uncles play a major role

in guiding and counselling the two. They teach them about mariage and what is

expected when one gets married. The young lady is told of her roles by the aunts
and fhe young man by the uncles.



--- Page 27 ---
Dramatise courtship for different tribes. .
2. Research on the role of courtship in marriage and present your findings in
class.

In pairs, discuss modern day and indigenous ways of courtship.

In groups, discuss healthy boy-girl relationships.

-w&

Word search
The words are found.across or down. Find as many words that are linked to love
and courtship as you can.

Give 3 roles of courtship.
Which two family members play a huge role in helping those who are in
courtship?

is an aunt in Kalanga.
Amongst the Ndau, a young man approaches the first before
the .

Who initiates courtship in the African set up?

What is done in the Shona culture to establish a relationship between two
parities?

Give one way through which guidance and counselling helps those who are
in courtship.

Who guides a courting couple in Indigenous culture?



--- Page 28 ---
2C. Indigenous marriage customs

There are a number of indigenous marriage practices within different ethnic groups
in Zimbabwe. Marriage is an important rite of passage in all cultures. The different
marriage practices among the different groups include musengabere, kutizira,
Kuzvanira, Kutema ugariri, kugana, umthimba, ukwendiselwa and kutumira. There
are also modern ways of marriage customs. These include Christian weddings. If
the lady is Ndebele and the young man Shona then both marriage customs have
to be done. However, the common custom among most ethnic groups is the one
where the young man sends representatives to the lady's family to ask for her
hand in marriage. Below are some of the indigenous marriage customs:

a) Musengabere

This is an African mariage practice which was
more common among the Shona. A young man
man would secretly look for a girl wnom he
would want to marry. If the young man sees the
oi he wants he would carry her to his family’s
home without the girl's approval. A young man
would choose musengabere if the girl refuses to
marry him. At the young man's home the gil is
convinced and expected to accept him and
be his wife. Marriage proceedings start when
Me girl and lobola is paid. The two then become
husband and wife as soon as all the proceedings
are done. This type of marriage custom is not
allowed anymore because it is against human

Aghts.

b) i Kutizira

in this practice, a young man and young lady fall in love and the girl elopes to
go and stay with the young man. Some of the Shona people send a sadombo or
representatives to the girl's family so as to inform them. Lobola negotiations start
s00n afterwards.

Musengabere

c) Kuzvarira

Traditionally, it was done to help a family in times of hunger or any other problem
3 family would be facing. If parents of the girl are poor and would like some help
from someone rich, they would give the girl in exchange of either livestock or
food. The girl does not have a choice. It does not matter if the man has other
wives. Kuzvarira is still practised in some churches of the apostolic sects.

qd) Kukumbira/Kupereka/Ukucela(amalobolo)

The boy's family goes to the girl's family to ask for her hand in marriage. Marriage
proceedings then begin. All marriage proceedings are followed until the girl is
handed to the husband's family where she is received officially in a ceremony.

The above marriage customs can also be seen amongst other ethnic groups in
e country. The modern customs take into account the cultural lobola custom.



--- Page 29 ---
However, within the Christian groups after lobola the couple has a white wedding
and they are joined in matrimony by. a licensed church official. Those who are
not Christian have a celebration or matrimony and joined by a judge or marriage
officer.

Activity 4

1. Discuss the different types of marriage ceremonies in Zimbabwe.

2. Act out different types of mariage ceremonies.

3. Discuss the differences between indigenous and modern day marriage
customs.

Exercise 4

Two examples of indigenous marriages are and

Which indigenous marriage practice is against the law?

Give two differences between indigenous and modern marriage practices.
Give two similarities of indigenous and modern marriage practices.

Within the Christian groups what happens after lobola?

When a Tonga and Shona are getting married

SUR ON >

2D. Marriage: Civil and customary

Civil marriages a

Civil marriage under the customary Act/
Christian marriage states that the man
mamies one wife and vows under a mariage | | | remnant
officer or a magistrate. A mariage certificate | |'\ ete
is given to the two to show their union. | oe

Mire Motiak Je Cis Maly Bock OF Plats tones

Wertificate of Marringe

A marriage certificate is a very important

document for a lot of reasons. Some of the

reasons are:

¢ It helps a woman change her surname
if she wants to take her husband's \(&==———
surname. Matriage certificate

* It helps married couples travel together if they wish to, especially overseas.

° It helps if you want to jointly own a house.

* When one partner dies, the other can prove that she or he was married te
them so as to hold on the property they got together while they were married.

* It helps the mother travel with her underage children without having a hard

time proving that they are hers.

\ Et
. oi Se

{



--- Page 30 ---
jage

The customary marriage

This is marriage according to indigenous systems of Customary laws which are
found among indigenous people. Under these laws, a man can marry more than
one wife. There are other marriages also recognised like The Unregistered
Customary Union where the husband may marry more than one wife. The couple
can go through lobola ceremony but still do not have a marriage certificate. The
other type of customary marriage is the living together. There are no formalities
like lobola, The man and woman just freely consent to live together. In Shona it is
kubika mapoto. In Ndebele it is ukuhlalisano.

List down any three types of marriages.

Which marriage would you regard to be the best? Discuss in pairs.
Listen ds a resource person explains the different marriages and their
advantages and disadvantages.

Exercise 5

Define the following:
a) Customary marriage

b) Civil marriage

What evidence is there to show that a couple is in a civil marriage partnership?
ls staying with your fiancé without a white wedding allowed by the courts?
Couples get mariage certificates during the lobola process. [TRUE/FALSE]
Does the law allow men to marry more than one wife?
Give two advantages of having a marriage certificate.

Ov Gy be Go Nh

Summary

* There are various rites of passage for the different stages of development
of a human being. Examples are birth, infancy, adolescence and marriage.
These stages are celebrated differently by different ethnic groups.

* Courtship plays an important role in mariage. It is the stage when relations are
buili between the young man and woman and both their families.

* Guidance and counselling are important practices within ethnic groups when
a couple is courting for marriage. Aunts and uncles play an important role in
this practice.

* There are different marriage customs for the many ethnic groups in Zimbabwe.
However, all groups practice lobola.

* Modern maniage practices are also practiced in Zimbabwe. Some area result
of different ethnic groups getting married and others are Christian practices.

* The courts in Zimbabwe allow both customary and civil mariages. Civil
marriages offer a marriage certificate to the couple.



--- Page 31 ---
End of of topic assessment test

| Multiple choice questions
1. The different stages of growth are celebrated in different ways within

different .

A. children B. animals C.ethnic groups D. celebrations
2. The umbilical cord is cut with a piece of grass called

A. thread B. uqunga = C.. ufshani D. umlotha

3. Af puberty, girls’

A. voice deepens B. hips become wider
C. testicles drop a little D. hair start to grow on chin
4. At puberty, boys
A. grow breasts B. start menstruating
Cc. develop deep voices D. start wearing skirts
5. What do we call the practice when a boy and girl want to marry?
A. courtship B. puberty C. mariage D. adolescence
6. Couples exchange as a sign of love.
A. tokens B. numbers C. houses D. hands

7. What is the role of an aunt or grandfather in mariage?
A. guidance and counseling B. beating the girl
C. praying for the girl D. laughing at the girl
8. Aperiodreached by children between 11 and 15 years is called
A. courtship B. puberty C. mariage D. teen
9. Which type of mariage allows a man and woman to live together without a
marriage certificate?

'
Il
i

A. living together B. registered union |
C. civil mamage D. customary mariage
10. When a person is legally married he or she should have a
A. marriage certificate B. birth certificate
C. death certificate D. grade seven certificate

Structured questions

1. List three stages of human development.

2. Atinfancy a baby is given to strengthen and protect it.

3. Why is it important to immunize babies?

4. Give two reasons why courtship is important.

5. Give two changes that take place in boys at puberty stage.

6. What do we call the stage of development between childhood and
adulthood?

7. It is important to have a healthy boy-girl relationship because ___s and

8. Write two indigenous ways of courtship.

9.

1

Name three types of marriage practices in Zimbabwe.
0. Give two advantages of civil marriages.


--- Page 32 ---
| Glossary

Adolescence

Infancy
Society

Rifes

Gg stage of growth between childhood:and maturity.
anieary stage of development of a child.

group ef people who live together and have some
common practices:

recognised stages of development in.a person's life:



--- Page 33 ---
Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:

identify the pre-colonial states

describe the social, political and economic life in pre-colonial era

describe the first contact between Europeans and the indigenous people
explain the effects of the first contact between Europeans and indigenous
people

outline the development of indigenous laws

identify the roles of community leaders at local level

identify local governments

explain the functions of local government.

FON>

Flashback

|. Talk about the picture.
2, Discuss about other pre-
colonial states you know of.

Keywords

tribute rules.

Introduction

The pre-cotonial kingdoms include the Great Zimbabwe, Mutapa State, Rozvi State
and Ndebele State. These kingdoms’ social, economic and political lives were
different from today. In this unit you will study the social, economic and political
life of the pre-colonial kingdoms of Zimbabwe. You will also study the occupation
of Zimbabwe by the Whites.



--- Page 34 ---
= 3A. The pre-colonial kingdoms

' The pre-colonial states were all kingdoms as they were ruled by Kings. The Great
Zimbabwe was led by the people of the Shiri (Hungwe) totem, the Mutapa by
Nyatsimba Mutota and his successors, the Rozvi by Changamire Dombo and his
successors and finaly, the Ndebele State was led by Mzilikazi and later Lobengula.
They were made up of people originally from Zimbabwe, except for ihe Ndebele
State which was originally made up of people who came from South Africa. All
four states had a tribute payment system. Tribute is a payment made time again
by subjects to a ruler. This is done as a sign of dependence and respect io the
ruler, The states where also involved in trade with other states and with whites. All
states kept cattle for food, trade and lobola payment. Owning cattle was a sign

US of wealth and it gave the wealthy the power to lead others. The Great Zimbabwe,

Mutapa and Rozvi states were all involved in mining, farming, trade and tribute

collection,

The states believed in the existence of a God whom they called Mwari, except
for the Ndebele who called him uNkulunkulu/Somandla/Umlimu. All the states
believed in appeasing ancestors and communicating with God through them.
Spirit mediums played a big role in communicating with ancestral spirits. All four
states believed in life after death and some buried the deceased with their
property so as to take it to the next life.

The people in all the states were divided into different social classes. There was the
royal family, officials, clergy and the subjects. The clergy were the religious leaders
and they were made up of spirit mediums and n'angas. The Ndebele state had
3 different social life from the other three states. If was made up of the Nguni
(Khumalo people), people raided along the way and some of the people they
raided when they got to Zimbabwe. A person's status in the Ndebele state was
according to where the person came from. Abenhla were the raided Tswana,
Pedi and others who joined willingly, the Zansi were the Knhumalo who came with
Mzilikazi from South Africa and the Hole were the Shona and the local tribes.

Activity 1

1. Using the internet and other books, research on the pre-colonial kingdoms
of Zimbabwe. Present your findings in class.

2. Visit pre-colonial historical sites like the Khami monuments and the Great

Zimbabwe.

Role play the tribute payment of a pre-colonial state of your choice.

ae

Bre

cal . What was/is the Shona name for God?

jon . List the four pre-colonial states of Zimbabwe.

I . Tribute is



--- Page 35 ---
Write down four similarities of the social structure of all four states.
The Ndebele also called/call their God “Mwari". [TRUE/FALSE]
What was the role of spirit mediums in all states?

Where did the Ndebele come from?

What was the social structure of the Ndebele state?

3B. Effects of first contact with Europeans

The first group of Europeans to make
contact with people in Zimbabwe
where the Portuguese. The Portuguese
used the missionaries and their
activities to trick the black people of
Zimbabwe. The Portuguese monarchy
offered financial support to the church
and its missions and in return the church
was fo help them with their grand
dreams of controlling the indigenous
people and their land. The Portuguese
tried to use missionaries in the Mutapa
state to achieve their goals. They
even managed to convert the King
Mapunzagutu to Christianity. The Portuguese managed to baptize about 300
people in the Mutapa Kingdom.

In 1859, the London Missionary society was granted a station in Matabeleland by
Mailikazi. This was because of the friendship between Mzilikazi and Robert Moffat.
Mzilikazi promised that the missionaries will be well protected and taken care
of. Even his son Lobengula kept that promise. The King, Mazilikazi, allowed the
missionaries to preach but never converted to Christianity. Those who showed
interest in the Religion were killed. Lobengula also allowed the missionaries to settle
in Zimbabwe but did not convert. He allowed a mission station at Hope Fountain
in 1870. Colonialisis continued to promote missionary work, hoping to spread
colonialism. In some of the missions, the missionaries also taught the indigenous
people skills in agriculture, carpentry, general hygiene, how to read and write. The
indigenous people were also taught mathematics. All the missions were schools,
clinics and preaching stations.

In their contact with European settlers, the indigenous people staried trading with
them. The states, for example the Mutapa. increased as they needed ivory for
trade. The ivory was for external trade with Portuguese traders. They would trade
the tusks for less valuable things like glass beads, cloth and porcelain.


--- Page 36 ---
Zimbabwe, rich in minerals and livestock attracted many white people. Lobengula,
King of the Ndebele, signed a lot of treaties that came with the white man. The last
freaty that led to the occupation of Zimbabwe was the Rudd Concession. It was
signed between Lobengula, Charles Rudd, Rotchford Maguire and Francis Robert
Tompson. These men were sent by Cecil John Rhodes. This contract gave the white
men mining rights among other things. In return, Lobengula would be given 100
pounds every month, 1000 guns, 10000 rounds of ammunition and a gunboat on
the Zambezi River to protect him from his enemies. In 1890, a group of white settlers
called the pioneers seitled in Mashonaland and started farming and mining. On
12 September 1890, they hoisted their flag at Fort Salisbury, now Harare. Rhodes’
company was called the British South African Company (BSAC). The company had
about 200 men and the couniry was called Rhodesia after Rhodes.

Research on and list three missionaries in early Zimbabwe.
In groups, discuss about the lifestyle changes brought by the early contacts
with the missionaries.

Who were the first group of Europeans to make contact with the Indigenous

people of Zimbabwe?

What was the role of missionaries in Zimbabwe before colonisation?

Which ruler killed people for converting to Christianity?

Which King converted to Christianity?

Who was the owner of the British South Africa Company?

State two missions that were built in Zimbabwe before colonisation.

Why did the Mutapa people hunt more elephants for trade with the
Portuguese?

Who was given mining rights in Zimbabwe?

3C. Development of indigenous laws

Rules and laws show the basic values within a society. A rule is a guide or order to
De followed. Laws are rules enforced by the courts. Dating back to the Stone Age.
aw and order were important for the growth and existance of the people. Likewise,
ron Age people were governed by rules and laws. Law breakers were made to
pay fines in form of cattle, at times hard labour and corporal punishment. There
were no policemen or policewomen like today but people still obeyed the laws of
the land. There were kings and chiefs who had their own courts where lawbreakers

were tried.



--- Page 37 ---
Traditional laws and courts
King's court (king presided)

Chief's court (chief presided)

Headman's coun (headman presided)

Village court (village head presided)

Family (family elder presided)

Traditional courts were mainly meant to maintain social peace and harmonyin the:
community. The structure was hierarchical. At family level, disputes were settled
at family courts. Family heads such as grandfathers offered advice to those in
conflict.

ft

~

ii A
ra =

‘ vA
, ‘

a ;

— al EA
me] - ‘a,
o

At village level, it was the village head who presided over Cases. Only minor cases
such as peity theft were tried and resolved there. The next court was that of the
headman. The chief's court comes after the headman'’s. The highest was the king's
court. The king's court was attended by elderly men of the community, selected


--- Page 38 ---
the
led
Bin

uses
ihe
he’s
ties

wise men, the king's messengers, the disputing parties and their witnesses. Once
found guilty, the accused was made to pay a fine in the form of livestock or grain
or punished accordingly. Nowadays there are local governments. Communities
we in large numbers like towns, cities and provincies. Law breakers are taken to
me different courts like the supreme courts and provincial courts.

3D. Local government

Socc0! government refers mainly to urban councils or rural councils, The councilors
Ge responsible for making decisions, distributing resources and providing services
& district and ward level. Councils control many issues affecting the day to
Say lives of residents. The councils get their authority from the Minister of Local
Government, Rural and Urban Development. Every by-law made by the councils
snouid be approved by the ministry.

Urban councils are responsible for all the water functions for the city people. They
Gre also responsible for all dumping sites and waste in cities. The councils in towns
are responsible for the control and prevention of the spread of any diseases in
cities. They also control the housing facilities, the recreational facilities, learning
nstitutions, libraries as well as roads among other things.

Sal councils provide land for resettlement. They provide transport, health
Pe education facilities. They also provide other services to people under their
}Sdiction. Rural councils are led by a Chief Executive Officer from the ministry.

oditional leaders

® Me olden days, chiefs were installed by masvikiro.
Wesvikiro communicate messages from the ancestors
@d fney would install a chief chosen by the ancestors.
THis installation made the chief the custodian of the
‘ond on behalf of the ancestors. Nowadays, chiefs are
appointed by the president of the republic of Zimbabwe.
The traditional leaders act chapter 29.17 states the
appointment of chiefs, headmen, village heads and the
establishment of council of chiefs. The act also defines
their duties and functions.

Traditional chiefs, village heads or headman perform
@ variety of legislative. administrative and ceremonial
tasks and duties. Most of their duties are ancient, for example, conducting a rain
meting ceremony mukwerera/hosana. They are also responsible for collecting and
Gebuting surplus produce of their communities referred to as zunde ramambo/
Sera senkosi, settling disoutes between members of their communities,
le"Fh9 or punishing offenders in their communities, performing ceremonial

Modern day chief



--- Page 39 ---
duties in connection with deaths, harvests, asking for rain and other important

occasions. Traditional chiefs are also responsible for informing their people of any
new rules or regulations from the government.

1, Dramatise a traditional meeting where the chief is distributing surplus food to
the people.
2. Using the internet, find out how a chief conducts a trial session.

Exercise 3

What are local governments?
List four roles of the urban councils in the community.

List three roles of the rural councils.

What are the two main functions of local governments?

What is the role of the traditional chief in a village? Give 2 answers.
What is zunde ramambo/isiphala senkosi?

SoPron>

Summary

* The four precolonial states that were covered in this topic are the Great
Zimbabwe, Mutapa, Rozvi and Ndebele States.

* Contact with Europeans led to some indigenous people converting to
Christianity, it increased elephant hunting and led to the construction of
missions.

* Indigenous laws were developed to maintain order among people.

* Village heads, chiefs and councilors all have differentroles to playin maintaining
order and making sure that people are well taken care of.

ale me) topic assessment test J

Multiple choice questions

One example of a precolonial state is .
A. USA B. Bulawayo C. Rhodesia D. Rozvi
The states believed in the appeasement of

A. people B. other states

C. ancestors D. kings

The Mutapa that established the Mutapa state was
A. Portuguese B. Munhumutapa
C. Mufota D. Gatsi Rusere
is a payment made time-and again by subjects to the ruler.
A. Salary B. Tribute C. Loan D. Gold



--- Page 40 ---
ant

reat

¥ to
n of

hing

The Mutapa State traded with ___.
A. the Americans B. Rhodes
C. the Portuguese D. Missionaries
is the Ndebele name for God.
A. Nyoatsimba B. Tshaka
C. Mwari D. Nkulunkulu
Who owned BSAC?
A. Robert Moffat B. Charles Rudd
C. Cecil jonn Rhodes D. Rotchford Maguire
Which of the following is an example of a mission established in pre-colonial
Zimbabwe?
A. World vision B. St Giles
C. Jairos Jiri Association D. Hope Fountain
Mzilikazi was of the state.
A. Zulu B. Shona C. Ndwandwe_ OD. Ndebele

. Chiefs are appointed by

A. the President B. the village headman
C. the people D. the elders

Structured questions

Write two differences between the Mutapa and the Ndebele.

Who was the ruler of the Mutapa state?

What did the Mutapa use for trade with the Portuguese?

List goods which the people in the Mutapa kingdom got from trading
with the Portuguese.

Where did the Ndebele come from?

______—- was Lobengula's father.

How was a person’s status measured in the Ndebele state?

Which Ndebele king was cheated into signing the Rudd Concession?
Write two duties of the chief?

What is a zunde ramambo/isiphala senkosi?

Who controls the work af the chief?

What is an urban council?

Write three responsibilities of urban councils.

How did the imperialists use the missionaries in their dream of colonising
Zimbabwe?

What attracted white people to Zimbabwe?

= thefirstte desomething.
= exchanging goods for money or for something.
- onagreement between two countries.


--- Page 41 ---
12.

End of term one assessment test }

Multiple choice questions
make up a community.

A. Children B. Families C. Adults D. Churches
Which family consists of a husband, wife and children?

A. Single parent B. Polygamous

C. Nuclear D. Child-headed

A child-headed family involves the ___ child taking care of the young ones.
A. youngest B. eldest C. only D. talkative
Who has the responsibility of taking care of the children in a family?

A. Sisters B. Brothers

C. Parents D. Grandparents

What is human migration?

A. Movement of people from one place to another.

B. Gathering of people in one place.

C. Celebrating together.

D. Living together.

Which are the two types of migration?

A. Horizontal and vertical migration B. Up and down migration
C. Internal and international migration D. West and east migration
Which one is a push factor of migration?

A. Unemployment B. Fertile lands

C. Low crime rate D. Better living standards
When people move into a new country for new jobs it is ___

A. emigration B. immigration

C. external migration D. internal migration
What is conflict?

A. Talking B. Fighting or quarrelling
C. Whispering D. Excitement

. Effects of conflict at school are

A. domestic violence and child abuse

B. unhappiness and depression in the family
C. fights and quarrels among learners

D. gang violence

. Conflict can be solved through .

A. fighting B. gossiping

C. violence _ D. discussing together
___ is one of Zimbabwe's indigenouns languages.

A. |Igbo B, Tonga

C. French D. English



--- Page 42 ---
C. musengabere

. Anegative effect of migration is
A. squatter camps
C. industry Boom

. What causes squatting?

A. Voice deepens
C. Breasts develop

A. Hips widening
C. Voice deepens
; is considered nuclear in Indigenous Religion.
A. Monogamy B. Child headed
. Lack of immunisation can cause
B. diarrhoea
. What is courtship?
A. Preparation for marriage
C. Getting maried
22 The main role of courtship is to
B. build relations
. Who plays the main role in courtship?
A. Brother and sister
©. Aunt and uncle
What role does an aunt play in marriage?
A. Guidance and counseling
Cc. Praying for the girl
Which one is a modern way of marriage?
A. Musengabere
Cc. White wedding

3. Christians practice when getting married.

OF OF

Of

job creaction
. inter marriages

. Land shortages
. Which culture puts ash on the baby’s umbilical cord?

C. Ndebele

. What changes can one see on a girl at puberty?

B. Wider shoulders

D. Muscles grow large

. What changes are seen on a boy at puberty?

B. Breasts growing

D. Wish to be independent

Cc.

Cc.

B
D.
Cc

OF

Ow

B.
D.

Civil marriage law states that a man marries
B. three wives

D. four wives

FA is given to show a civil marriage union.

B. marriage certificate
D. ring

&. White wedding
‘=. Musengabere

E Which of the following marriage ways is not allowed by the constitution?

D. Polygamy

. Going to court

Mother and father
. Grandparents

Beating the girl
. Laughing at the girl

Kutema ugariri

B. Lobola

D. Kutizira



--- Page 43 ---
_ Inthe Shona culture, customary marriage with no formalities is known as

39,

40.

A. kutizira B. kubika mapoto
Cc. musengabere D. kugarira
is a result of conflict.

A. Strained relationship B. Love

C. Happiness D. Oneness
, What does a boy and a girl exchange as a sign of love?

A, Token B. Bangles

C. Hands D, Houses
. Puberty is usually between sears.

A. 8-10 B. 11-15

C. 16-18 D. 20-24
. Kingdoms are ruled by a

A. chief B. president Cc. king D. headman
. ___ was the king of the Mutapa State?

A. Moyo B. Mutota C. Dombo D. Rozvi

. Which pre-colonial state traded with the Portuguese?

A. Zulu B. Mutapa
C. Pedi D. Tswana

. The other name for uUNkulunkulu is

A. |she B. Mwari C, Umlimu D. Mambo

. The first group of Europeans to make contact with Zimbabweans were the

A. Zambians B. Malawians C. Portuguese D. Batswana

. Which King was converted to Christianity by the Portuguese?

A. King Muswati B. King Lobengula

C. King Mapunzagutu D. Nyatsimba Mutota
Who granted the London Missionary Society a station?

A. Lobengula B. Nyatsimba Mutota

Cc. Changamire Dombo D. Mailikazi

Those who showed interest in Christianity and converted were ___ by
Mzilikazi.

A. applauded B. killed

C. appreciated D. rewarded

. What attracted the white people to Zimbabwe?

A. Minerals and livestock B. The people
Cc, Animals D. Vegetation

. Which traditional court was at the top of the hierarchy?

A. Headman’s court B. Village court

C. Chief's court D. King’s court
. The solved cases at village level.

A. village head B. headman

C. family head D. chief



--- Page 44 ---
. Councilors get their authority from
A. Chiefs
B. President
C. Ministry of Local Government, Rural and Urban Development
D. Sfate

45. According to the constitution, who appoints Chiefs?

A. President B. Kings
C. Village heads D. Councilors
» | 46. Who signed the Rudd Concession?

A. Tshaka B. Lobengula

C. Nyatsimba Mutota D. Rotchford Maguire
47. Moving back to one’s motherlandis called —_.

A. seasonal migration B. return migration

C. external migration D. internal migration
48. Working together as a family promotes

A, conflict B. indiscipline

C. development in the home D. problems in the home

as :

32. Which state did Changamire Dombo belong to?

Structured questions

a) A family consists of , and

5) Identify three types of families.

c) What is a child-headed family?

os} What causes a single- parent family?

&) What is internal migration?

5) List the types of migration.

<=) What are the causes of migration?

© identify any positive effects of migration.

&) Conflict is .

©& What causes conflict at home and at school?

= Howcan conflict at home and school be solved?
What effects come with conflict in the community?

List any three languages in Zimbabwe.

Wentify any four African marriage cultural practices.

Which marriage practice has been borrowed from the English?
Christians practice for those who want to marry?
Sate any three ceremonies or rituals performed in Zimbabwe.
Who helps deliver children among the Ndau?

Why is immunisation important?

L= any three diseases prevented by immunisation.

\2O RRR AlAH

#°_ In the Ndebele culture the umbilical cord is cut with a piece of grass known
A, thread B. uqunga C, ufshani D. umlotha

A. Ndebele B. Mutapa C. Rozvi D. Khumalo

(2)
(3)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)



--- Page 45 ---
What is adolescence?

Name any practice for giris who reach adolescence in Zimbabwe.

List three changes in boys at puberty.

List three changes in girls at puberty.

What is courtship?

Identify any practices done during courtship.
List any three indigenous marriage customs.
Briefly narrate what happens in musengabere.
What is civil marriage?

What is customary marriage?
Who is involved in customary marriage?
Identify the pre-colonial states in Zimbabwe.
Which treaty was signed by Mzilikazi and why?
Why did the Portuguese come to Zimbabwe?

List any three components which attracted the whites to Zimbabwe.

Traditional courts include ___, _ __ and

— Who deals with conflict or problems at family level.

Identify any three responsibilities of councillors.
What is mukwerera?

Three reasons for having a marriage certificate include



--- Page 46 ---
Entitlements/Rights and responsibilities

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:
1. outline basic entitlements/rights and responsibilities of the child
2. define citizenship

3. outline different types of citizenship

4. identify qualities of a good citizen

5. demonstrate attributes of patriotism

6. state rights and responsibilities of citizens

7. distinguish between rights and responsibilities

8. identify limitations to rights and responsibilities

9. describe gender based protection

10. explain forms of abuse

11. describe gender based protection laws

12. explain forms of gender based protection

. describe the roles of the police.

Flashback

1. In groups, discuss human rights.
2. What are your rights as children?

Key words

fights  childabuse citizenship gender _—_ citizen

introduction

) Rights are those things one is entitled to regardless of one's race, creed, political
affiliation or ethnic group. All people have some rights as per the United Nations
Charter. Children as well have their own rights. Together with these rights, children
also have responsibilities. To each right there is a responsibility or obligation. In this
topic you will learn about rights, responsibilities, citizenship, abuse, gender and the

role of the police force.



--- Page 47 ---
4A. Entitlements/Rights and responsibilities of the child

The Children's Rights Charter

The Children's Rights Charter (CRC) is a United Nations document specifying all
the children's rights. The African countries also came up with their own
document containing children's rights. This is the African Charter. Both these
documents agree onthe importance of children's rights and that they must
be respected . Article 1 of the CRC defines a child as every human being below
the age of eighteen years. Study the diagram below.

freedom of expression
freedom from civil rights and religion of choice
prture freedoms
name & belonging

family and .
education leisure &
care as
cultural activities

environment

balanced food basic health &welfare basic access to
health

Children's rights

According to the CRC, the children’s rights can be divided into groups.

A. Civil rights and freedom

These include the right to:

* express oneself freely and one's view to be heard
* choose religion of one's choice

* privacy

* not to be tortured or punished in any cruel manner


--- Page 48 ---
B. Family and care

These include the right to:

* aname and belong to a family

* be cared for by their parents

* nationality. identity and having all the national documents such as a birth

er certificate, passport or national identity card
ese .

List C. Basic health and welfare

Lay These include the right to:

access to the best health possible
to have a balanced diet

. »! =

BD. Education, leisure and cultural activities
These include the right to:

* education as if is a basic human right

* aconducive learning environment

Responsibilities

Mere are responsibilities or duties or obligations
*at go hand in hand with rights. Children have
Sright to education but it is their responsibility
*S read and do their homework. Children have
G right to shelter, but their responsibility to
m=ip fake care of it by not breaking things

| Ground the house and sweeping their rooms.
Children have the right to be taken care of
Sut jt is their responsibility to obey and listen
% their parents.

Activity 1

What should | do as a child:

G) athomeorin my community?

6b) dtschool?

c) for my nation?

Research on how the community assists children whose rights are abused,

Define a child.
Give two health and welfare rights.
Ust three examples of children's responsibilities.



--- Page 49 ---
What does CRC stand for?
What are the two examples of civil rights and freedom?
Basic health and welfare rights include .

nak]

4B. Citizenship

What is a citizen?

A citizen isa member of a state or country with full rights regardless of race, religion,
creed, political affiliation or ethnic group. Therefore, citizenship refers to belonging
to a country. According to the constitution of Zimbabwe, a person is a citizen of
Zimbabwe by birth, descent or registration.

Citizenship by birth

A person is a Zimbabwean citizen by birth if he/she was born in Zimbabwe and
when either his/her parents or grandparents are citizens of Zimbabwe.

Or
A person born of a Zimbabwean citizen working outside Zimbabwe for the state.

Citizenship by descent

In Zimbabwe, a person is a citizen by descent if born of either parents or
grandparents who are citizens by birth or descent or either one of his/her parents:
is a Zimbabwean citizen by registration and their birth registered in Zimbabwe.

Citizenship by registration

Any person who has been married to a Zimbabwean citizen for at least 5 years.
Or
Any person who has been continuously and lawfully resident in Zimbabwe for af
least 10 years.
Or
A child who is not a Zimbabwean citizen but adopted by a Zimbabwean citizen,

Qualities of a good citizen

Good citizens:

are loyal to their nation or couniry

observe the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions
respect the national flag and the national anthem

respect the leaders and all the laws of the couniry

support all country programs

defend their country and its sovereignty

In actual fact, citizenship is characterised by a strong sense of belonging ang
commitment to the nation. This is shown by participating in national events like
Independence, Heroes and Defence forces day/holidays.



--- Page 50 ---
jon,
bing
n of

and

ite.

5 or
ents

br at

en.

and
Slike

I Activity 2

2. Participate in a community cleanup campaign.
@ in groups, discuss the qualities of a good citizen.
3. Listen as. a resource person explains citizenship.

Exercise 2

What is citizenship?

Give two ways that make someone a citizen of Zimbabwe.

What are the two qualities of a good citizen?

How does someone become a citizen by registration?

Anyone married to a Zimbabwean for at least 5 years can become a
citizen of the country. [True/False]

4C. Rights and responsibilities of a citizen in Zimbabwe

Rights

According to the constitution of Zimbabwe, every citizen has the following rights.
Right to:

* food and.drink

* safe clean water

* shelter and clothes

* speak freely

* freely worship religion of one’s choice

* a name, identity and access all identity documents, for example, birth
certificate, passport

health care

human dignity

agricultural land

personal security

life

Responsibilities of citizens

4 responsibility is a duty one is supposed fo carry out. It is the responsibility of all
citizens to:

* observe and keep the laws of their country

try and defend their country's laws

work hard together with others in the development of the couniry

respect the rights of other people

assist the needy of the society, for example, the blind



--- Page 51 ---
Limitation of rights and responsibilities

The rights of freedom and responsibilities must be exercised considering other
people's rights and freedom. Whilst exercising one's rights, be careful not te
interfere with someone else's rights. However, there is no law that limits the right
life, human dignity and fair trial. Rights may be limited by a written law.

Activity 3

1. List down children’s responsibilities to adults, parents, other peers, their school}
ond country.
2. Study and complete ihe table below.

Education Attend school daily
Study hard
Do:all school assignments

Agricultural land
Health care

Sufficient food

Protection

Religion of one's choice

3. Using the internet, find out the rights and responsibilities of children at home.

Exercise 3

Rights are .
Respondibilities are

List three rights of citizens in Zimbabwe.

What are the two things that show patriotism in citizens?

Give two responsibilities of a good citizen.

Give one thing that limits citizens’ rights and physical responsibilities.



--- Page 52 ---
other
>t to
hi to

4D. Abuse of children, women and men

Child abuse

Child abuse is when a child's rights are not honoured or respected. Infringing on
a child's rights is abuse. Adults normally abuse children, Many children in homes
‘ace different forms of abuse. Abuse normally induces fear and confusion in the
wictim. There are different forms of abuse.

Read the following story.

Alice is abused

Alice kept on crying or sobbing quietly to herself.
Sne hated herself. She didn't know what to do.
This usually happened when her father was away,
er stepmother would beat her up and deny her
e right to food. After all this she would show her
= knife and swear to kill her if Alice told anyone.

Ts very day, her father had gone to South Africa.
ins felt unwanted and unloved. She thought it
was her faulf that her mother had passed on. She
ought if she told someone she would be killed. if
me told her father, her father might beat her and
may chase her away. At times she thought of
murting herself. She was now in Grade 5 and at school she was shy and withdrawn.

In groups, discuss the following questions.
). What forms of abuse did Alice experience?

2 What do you think Alice should do?



--- Page 53 ---
3. How is this act by the stepmother affecting Alice?
4. What crime is Alice's stepmother committing?

Sexual abuse

This includes violating a child’s body through touching and other unlawful acts
such as rape or turning children into prostitutes. Pornography is another form of
sexual abuse. This is indecent exposure of children to pictures or films of naked
people which might lead children to indulge in such acts as they will be exposed
to them.

Verbal and bullying abuse

Verbal abuse includes, name calling, rudely laughing at someone, spreading
rumours about someone and also shouting unpleasant words. Bullying is another
type of abuse which mosily happens in schools. It includes teasing others, beating
others up and forcing other children to do what they don't want. This may lead to
poor performance in class and create fear in other children.

Men and women also face the different forms of abuse in one way or the other
Violence is another form of abuse experienced by many men and women. Abuse
has no gender as it affects everyone at different levels and ages in life. Women
and men can be physically and emotionally abused. Some women are beaten
by their husbands and some men by their wives.

Exercise 4

Define abuse.
List the four forms of abuse.

Give an example of physical abuse.

Is pornography a form of sexual abuse?
What is gender based protection?
Give three examples of sexual abuse.

4E. Gender based protection

What is gender?

Gender is the state of being male or female. However this is mainly used with
rerence io social. and cultural beliefs in the differences between males and females
(their roles). Traditionally, men and women have been assigned different roles.

Sak WN >

When men and women enjoy the same status, it is known as gender equity.
However, there are times when people are treated differently because of ther
gender. This is called gender discrimination. In this case one is treated in a certain
way because he is a man or she is a woman. Gender discrimination is seen in our



--- Page 54 ---
tes, at home, at school, in the church and even in the playground. Some
=s or traditions seem to support gender discrimination. Some young African
= Som and think that violence against women is acceptable and the young
san women accept it. However, this is unacceptable and the law is against
ms like girls should be in the kitchen and boys can go out to play are also
meced by most families. Men and women should always be treated equally.

mms of gender based protection

Gre policies put in place to protect gender based violence. Gender based
sction forms include peace order, domestic violence act and CEDAW.

ce order

§& ao document that is used to stop any form of abuse on a victim. A peace
f= 5 given by a court after one has applied for it. Normally, it is meant to stop
ence in homes or between people. For example, to stop wife beating which is
» common in most homes.

nestic violence act of 2007

tends to protect women and men against any forms of gender abuse or

ence. If also provides relief and protection of victims of gender based violence.
™s effect, victim friendly units in most police stations have been established for

Emoring abuse cases and helping in addressing gender based violence.

Dus”

mmen
toten

DAW- Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
sinst Women.

= & a United Nations assembly agreement. All countries of the world, including
sabwe, signed it. CEDAW explains gender based violence as violence to a
because she is a woman. This is violence directed to a woman on her
mecific. gender role in the society. Normally, men threaten or physically assault
amen because they are women.

=e

Bender based violence comes from certain cultural, social and religious practices
=> put women under men. It supports male power and control. In Zimbabwe,
der based violence is seen more in domestic violence were women are meant
submit under their husbands. Husbands usually abuse their wives. Women at
25 face sexual violence, physical violence, sexual assault, sexual exploitation,

i

pe exital rape, human trafficking and domestic violence.

S

fe ey are also certain traditional practices that violate woman's rights. These are
their = forced virginity testing

itain * pledging of women or girls for the purpose of appeasing spirits

1 our * child marriages, offering a girl as tribal goods



--- Page 55 ---
The CEDAW of 1979 covers fhe protection of women. The convention enforces the
need for countries to uphold equality between men and women in all areas, be
it economically, culturally or socially. CEDAW supporis the equality between men
and women in dll aspects of their lives.

5s women’s rights to chile

CEDAW is the only human right agreement that confirm
that shape gender roles

birth and targets culture and tradition as the influences
and family relations.

Forms of gender based violence
Forms of gender based violence include sexual violence, physical violence, sexucl
assault, sexual exploitation, marital rape, human trafficking and domestic violence

and genital mutilation.

Sexual abuse/violence

Sexual abuse is using force for any sexual act. Sexual abuse includes rape, verbo
abuse of asexual nature. torced marriage, forced abortion, genital mutilation ane
also virginity testing. It also includes denial of access To facilities of birth control
Sodomy and indecent assault are also other forms of sexual abuse. Indecent.
assault is inappropriate behaviour by other people such as touching, fondling of
breast, buttocks and genital organs.

Human trafficking

This involves the buying and selling of people, women and children, for pUrposs
of sexual exploitation. The women are kept in bondage and forced to live a
prostitutes, creating wealth for their owner and in the society at large. Humes
jrafficking is a serious crime that violates human rights. It affects almost all Th
countries in the world. Some countries are destinations for human traffickers

others are where people are taken from.


--- Page 56 ---
#s the Exercise 5
Is, be

men

Define gender.

What does CEDAW stand for?

Forced virginity testing is a form of gender based violence. [True or False]
What is gender based violence?

The domestic violence act supports violence against both men and women.
TTRUE/FALSE]

Give two examples of Gender Based Protection.

fat do you think is the main cause of gender based violence in the home?
Give 2 answers.

child
roles

aE Role of the police force

lerbal

hand = police are law enforcement agents. They arrest anyone who breaks the laws
introL 2 couniry. There are various roles played by the police officers in the country in
ecens HS So maintain peace and order.

ing of

Se rotes include:
menning roadblocks to ensure safety on the roads through checking the
Wenicles, licenses and speed rates

smesting offenders to ensure justice is served

montgining order

oes
BITion
ww the
Pcrie profecting citizens
Ssucating citizens



--- Page 57 ---
Summary

¢ Rights are things every child should have or be able to do as indicated in the
CRC. It is important for children to know their rights.

* Infringing or denying the children their rights is a form of abuse, the abuser is
can be arrested.

« Despite these rights, children stil experience different forms of abuse in one way
or the other from people they live with. Some cases go unreported.

* Due to a number of gender based violence, there are measures by the
government to fry and stop it.

* Despite all policies and laws to protect women, gender violence seems io

remain high because of certain cultural practices which seem acceptable. —
|

* AUN agreement was signed for the protection of women. This agreement is
called CEDAW.

| End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions
1. is part of children's rights.

A. Shelter B. Games _ C. Bullying D. Trafficking
2. are basic needs which every human being should have.
A. Food B. Rights C. Shelter D. Toys
3. CEDAW provides for the protection of ;
A. men B. boys C. learners D. women
4. Children have arightto _
A. be beaten B. sexual acts
C. health care D. CEDAW
5. Oneresponsibility of a learner at school is
A. attending school B. education

C. doing what she/he wants D. name and identity
6. Agood citizen of a country should .

A. do what he/she wants
B. work anywhere
C. respect the national flag and the national anthem
D. not respect leaders

! 7. Abuse is faced by ‘
A. men only B. women only
C. both men and women D. those not careful



--- Page 58 ---
. What is the peace order meant to do?

A. Make a husband beat his wife

B. Arrest the wife

C. Protect a woman from violence

D. Protect both the husband and wife

>, A convention that protects women from gender based violence is

A. CRC B. CEDAW

Cc. the police D. gender issues

. What is one traditional practice that violates women's rights?
A. Gender B. Abuse

C. Virginity testing D. Rape

Structured questions

. a) What are children's rights?
b) State two children’s rights.
Write two responsibilities of a good citizen.
Tanatswa was born in Zimbabwe and her parents were refugees. We say
he is a citizen of Zimbabwe by
c) Write one basic need for all citizens of Zimbabwe.

. The home plays a big role in preparing a child for good citizenship. [True
or False]

a) What do you do when someone infringes on your rights?

b) Write one form of sexual abuse.

5. a) Write one responsibility of a learner at school.

b) Write one right for all learners at school.

c) Whatright protects children from being denied food as punishment?
. Aperson who has the right to live in a particular country is a

a) Apolicy that protects women against violence in Zimbabwe is

b) Why are there many policies supporting women?

¢) Why is CEDAW such an important gender policy?

treat badly, infringing on someone's rights.
what one should do in honour of some entitlement.



--- Page 59 ---
Topic ee
as

Shelter

Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:

locate the major heritage sites in Zimbabwe

9. discuss why heritage sites are important fo our history and culture
3. discuss conditions of health and safety in shelter designs

4. suggest types of buildings suitable for disaster prone areas.

—

Flashback

In. pairs, talk about the types of shelter ind
For example. places with freezing tempera

temperatures.

a

Introduction
Shelter is one of the basic needs o

ifferent geographical locations.
tures and those with very hat

Keywords

plateau shelter summit

f all creatures. It is where people and animas
live. Shelter is for different purposes like offices, residence, protection, worshipping
and holding meetings. Above all, shelter protects creatures from harsh weathet
conditions. These different shelters are found in different shapes. sizes and type=
depending on the location and the weather where the shelter is. There are houses
caves, tents cabins, igloos, holes and many other forms of shelter in different par
of the world. Some Zimbabwe heritage sites were used for shelter in precolonie
Zimbabwe. In this topic we will look at shelter and heritage sites.

5A Shelter and heritage sites

The different heritage sites of Zimbabwe include Great Zimbabwe, Khami, Diodia
Mana Pools, Matojeni/Matopes, Nyanga Mountains, Chirinda Forest, Chinhow
Caves and Matendera. These sites help the couniry io earn foreign Currency
People from different countries visit the country to view these sites. The heritag=

sites in Zimbabwe were built by the iron age people.



--- Page 60 ---
——_... Victoria Fails
\ oN

. Whe. r ~Eastem
: - ' “Bijighianas

Mutare oe

reat Zimbabwe

Great Zimbabwe Monuments
‘an lron Age site. It was built

inimals m the Shona ancestors. It is
lipping = oldest heritage site in the
eather Seuniry. Great Zimbabwe is
|types, mend 27km south-east of
}OUSES, asvingo. The name of our

t parts Ssuriry, Zimbabwe, come from
iolonial monuments. The name
mbabwe was derived from
m Shona words ‘dzimba
Smabwe', meaning houses
Sone. Granite blocks of rock were used to build the walls.

Diodlo, © Great Zimbabwe comprises of two stone wall enclosures and huts remains
inhoyl severing an area of about 720 hectors. The two main stone wall enclosures are
ency. = Hill complex and valley enclosures. Gold deposits were also found at Great

eritage abwe.



--- Page 61 ---
Khami Monuments

The monuments are found west of Bulawayo
near Khami River. The monuments are
believed to have been built by the Torwa.
This is where the Torwa state capital was. It
is a set of eight ruins. The site is made up
of circular, terraced and artificial platforms
of soil and gravel that are kept together by
stone walls.

Dhlodhlo

The Dhlodhlo monuments are also kno
as Danangombe. These Iron Age Ruins of
the Zimbabwe tradition are found about
80 km north-east of Bulawayo. It is mainly &
series of terraced platforms. The walls are
decorated with check and herringbone
patterns. It is believed The Ancient Ruins
Company recovered large quantities &
gold from the site. This became the capite
of the Torwa state after its removal from
Khami.

Mana Pools

Mana Pools National Parkissituatedinthe fie
north of Zimbabwe. It includes the south [ze
bank and islands of the Zambezi River Fe
which marks the border of Zimbabwe
and Zambia. The park is known for its
wildlife and the flood plains. _st™ .
Matopo hills Matobo National Park is
situated south-west of Zimbabwe. The
Matobo Hills has a range of balancing
rock formations created by erosion of the
granite plateau. A plateau is an area of flat
ground that is higher than the surrounding
~ 3 area. There are also walls of Nswatugi and
= Ny Silozwe caves which feature Stone Agé
 -a ae + SY rock art. The grave of Cecil Rhodes, the
che we @\— founder of former British colony Rhodesia,
ES ex is also found in the summit of Malindidzimu.
Asummit is the top of a mountain or hill.

rs RST


--- Page 62 ---
+
‘

| Ruins
ties of

i) from

’. The
incing

Inyanga Mountains

Mount Nyangani is the highest mountain
n Zimbabwe. The mountain is found in
Nyanga. The Inyanga Mountains contain
a lot of beautiful sites like Mutarazi Falls,
Fungwe Falls and Inyangombe Falls.

Chirinda forest

Chirinda Forest Botanical Reserve is
about 950 hectares. It is situated on the
slopes of Mount Selinda, 30 km south of
Chipinge Highlands of Manicaland in
Zimbabwe.

7

apital -Chinhoyi Caves
. The Chinhoyi Caves are located 10km
_ west of Chinhoyi. Local people call them
Chirorodziva. Stories tell that these caves
were once used by the local people as
_ S refuge from raids by Ndebeles before
| Zolonisation. The caves are a National
and recreational park.

Activity 1

ark is . Collect different pictures of heritage sites and make a chart.

Use the internet to find out about various heritage sites in the country.

of the rear

are | “Clivity 2

grand esearch on the internet about the following monuments and complete the
E Age pe.

BS, the Name of monuments Who built the What materials were
idesia, monuments used

Oa. | SRSat Zimbabwe Shona(Mutapa) Granite rock



--- Page 63 ---
Dlodilo Ruins Torwa

(Danangombe})

Khami (near Bulawayo} Tonwa YRowI
Matendera (in BuUhera)
Umthwathe (near
Bulawayo}

Tsindi (near Marondera)
qwongembe(néar
Centenay) = —

Exercise 1

Who built Great Zimbabwe?
What type of sfone was used to build Great Zimbabwe?
From which ruins were gold deposits found?

Another name for Danangombe ruins is :
What was the purpose of the Chinhoyi caves during raids?

What famous patterns do we find on some of these ruins?

nun rwWnT

Importance of heritage sites to our history and culture

The heritage sites are a cultural resource that have brougnt development in the
local people who live in the areas. The sites are of great value to the local peop’s
The communities have received a number of benefits from the sifes. These Gr
economic, cultural, educational, social and environmental benefits. There

employment creation of the local people. For example, some are employed ©
tour guards to show people around. Drivers are also employed to drive tours
around parks. There are also hotels that employ people to cook and clean room
where tourists stay when they visit.

Cultural values are maintained as older people pass the history on to the youngs=
generation. The history of the heritage cites show that people lived in unity G
where one big family. They also define the roles that were done by different sexs
The heritage sites educate people on how people of long ago lived. They c&
show the hunting and gathering that was practiced by people. The sites also she
the younger generation the development that has taken place. ,

Activity 3

1. Identify ancient shelters you have heard about and explain them using th
information that follows. For each state:
a) Where itis found?

b) Who buill it?



--- Page 64 ---
—oeo

- moe SCHOOL:
i

c) Purpose of the shelter.

d) Its importance to the country.

SB Health and safety in shelter designs

Usually, the type and design of shelter is influenced by a number of factors. These
include availability of materials, availability of space and also climatic conditions.
Availability of water is the most important condition necessary before any building is
Suilt. Most buildings have certain safety precautions. Most buildings have windows
_ &nd air vents for ventilation. Windows have burglar bars for safety in the house. All
Goors have keys and locks for safety. The conical shapes of roofs allow water to
run down easily and quickly. In many buildings there are rim beams to strengthen
walls of buildings in case of earth tremors.

tures of various shelter found in various climatic regions

in the Availability of materials
pople. ® rural areas, round huts are made of wooden poles and mud. The huts are
are ™aiched with grass. Since fires are made in these kitchens there is a space
ere is Setween the wall and the roof. The space is for letting smoke out of the hut, that
ed as € ventilation. Recently huts are made of fire burnt bricks and thatched with grass.
durists Te materials are easily accessible. In towns, buildings are made of cement bricks

looms foofed with either iron sheets or asbestos and have tiled floors. The buildings can
‘= residential or industrial.

WNGEr ‘Climatic conditions

y¥ and flood prone areas or rainy areas huts are built on stilts. The buildings are raised so
Sexes, mat they are not washed away easily by floods. In very cold areas, for example, in
y also sreen land Eskimos build Igloos. These are dome-shaped huts made from blocks

}show “Gi ice, They keep people warm during winter.

= Tonga people live in the Zambezi Valley which is very hot and wet in the
miny season, The area also has many mosquitoes. The huts do not have windows
apd smoky fires are kept burning inside the hut to keep away mosquitoes. Each
mt has. a doorway and a ladder. They are built on stilts to protect themselves from
82 animals. In the Sahara desert two types of shelter are found, tents for Arab
= dsmen and shepherds and flat mud houses. They use tents as shelter because
= ne very hot conditions. Tents allow air to circulate. The mud houses can only be

%und near an oasis.



--- Page 65 ---
Exercise 2

people live in an igloo.
Write two factors which influence the type of shelter at any given place.
Give two ways in which buildings differ.

Why do people along the Zambezi Valley build their houses on stilts?
Which shelter do you find in the desert? Give two answers.

ahwWN>

5C. Special building designs in disaster prone areas

Floods

A building is influenced by its purpose as well as the place where it is situated.

Along the Zambezi Valley the Tonga build their huts on stilts because often there
are floods and wild animals. Shelter in flooding areas should be built higher from
the ground. When the level of water rises if must not get inside the house.

Cyclones
Cyclones and other storms with strong winds destroy houses. People should build

strong shelter. The buildings should have a strong foundation and walls. The root
should be firmly attached to the building to prevent it from lifting.

Earthquakes

When building a shelter in e
of building which is suitable.
on people they do not die. The walls are also made lighte

beams to hold the structure together. The floors are ma
materials such as chipboard or plywood.

Activity 4

Research
Find out the qualities of special buildings for disaster prone areas.

arthquake prone areas people need to know the typé

The roof should be made light such that in case it falls
r but supported by stee

de lighter as well using

Study the buildings in various climatic regions.

Pole and dagga, bricks, stone huts

All seasonal
Rainy regions 0 its; Neat type (reise buildings ) ”
Very cold regions \gloos

Desert 7 Tents, mud houses



--- Page 66 ---
Summary

Different shelters are built with different designs for different purposes.

Materials used depend on the location or site of the shelter,

The weather determines the type of shelter built.

Major heritage sites are important to the history and culture of Zimbabwe.

They act as tourist attraction sites, bringing foreign currency into the country.

* Climatic and geographical aspects also influence site, design and material to
be used for the type of shelter.

* In disaster prone areas, suitable buildings are built according to the type of

disasters prevelant.

oce.

s « 6 ¢6

ated, _End of topic assessment test

there
[from

Muitiple choice questions

|. The Heritage site found near Masvingo town is
| A. Dhlodhlo B. Buhera
C. Great Zimbabwe D. Khami
Our history tells us that all these monuments were built by
A. the first white people B. the San
C. the iron age people D. Lobengula and Rhodes
. Great Zimbabwe is important to the country because
type A. they are ruins B. it attract tourists to our country
t falls C. itis old D. it was built in the past
steel ; In some areas, they build houses on stilts to .
Fe} , A. attract people
B. make them beautiful
C. protect themselves from floods
D. make them be seen
=. What materials are used to build tall buildings?
A. Cement and bricks only — B. Iron, steel, concrete and bricks

2 roof

C, Water and bricks only D. Cement and steel rods
In flood prone areas, what type of buildings do you find? |
A. Stone houses B. Huts on stilts

C. Ice block huts D. Houses on the ground

>. One of the factors that influence the type of shelter to be built at an area
is |

A, tradition B. climate
C. language spoken D. available manpower
s. Two building materials used to build traditional rural shelter are
A, steel and concrete B. concrete and cement
C. tiles and iron sheets D, grass and poles
A shelter is a place where animals and people
A. feed B. live C. run D. wash



--- Page 67 ---
—_———

10. The monuments or heritage site found near Bulawayo is .
A. Chinhoyi Caves B. Matendera Ruins
C. Khami Monuments D. Great Zimbabwe Monuments

Structured questions

1. a) Which town is near Great Zimbabwe?
b) Why is Great Zimbabwe important in the history of the country?
c) What was the only material used inthe building of Great Zimbabwe? |
d) Which Stone Age people built the Khami Monuments?
2. a) What material is mainly used when building an igloo?
b) What type of shelter do Arab herdsmen prefer and why?
d) Why are most traditional shelters different in different parts of the world?
3 a) Write two factors that influence the type of shelter in an area?
b) Which type of shelter is common in rural areas of Zimbabwe?
c) What did people of long ago use to build their shelter?
4. What materials are used in the construction of high rise buildings?
5. a) In Zimbabwe, where do we find huts on stilts?
b) Why do we find many grass thatched huts in rural areas?
6. What type of shelters did the early Iron Age people use?
7. Give two ways in which buildings differ.

Glossary
Culture - the social behavior of 6 particular community or group of people:
Earthquake: - the shaking and destruction of the earth.
Floods - excess cover of water on the land.



--- Page 68 ---
Social services and volunteerism

Objectives

by the end of this lesson you should be able to:
identify prominent people and organisations involved in voluntary work in
the past and present

Sescribe the contribution of prominent people and organisations to
beneficiaries in the community

explain how local voluntary organisations empower communities

4. describe how they can participate in voluntary work.

) Flashback

a

1. Make a list of local social service providers.
2 Role play services provided by at least four service providers.

Keywords

prominent volunteerism voluntary organisations vulnerable
politiburo ex-combatants

introduction

Social services are public services targeting needy people in the society. The public
== vices include education, health, shelter and food handouts. Volunteerism helps
Gevernments manage the social services for the people. Volunteerism is the act
= performing a service freely or without payment. All people need these social
Services despite their economic status.

6A. Prominent people and organisations involved in voluntary

work in the past and present at local and national level

There are prominent people and organisations who take part in voluntary work
in the society. A prominent person is one who is known by many people. The
organisations and prominent people target vulnerable people in the community.



--- Page 69 ---
|

Vulnerable people are those in need. Voluntary organisations like Jairos Jin
Association, St Giles Rehabilitation Centre, Matthew Rusike home of orphans, Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) as well as church organisations have been
formed to help the vulnerable. Voluntary organisations are groups of companies
that offer their services for free, especially for the vulnerable or needy. There are
also prominent people like the late Sally Mugabe, Strive Masiyiwa and Jairos Jif
who have taken their time to help the vulnerable. The vulnerable include the
orphans, disabled, elderly and the poverty stricken.

Activity 1

Brain Storming
Word Search: Search for these words

crippled disabled illness destitute blind
beggars crafts band lame skill

Jairos Jiri
Jairos Jiri is one of Zimbabwe's heroes. He
was born near Masvingo in 1921. He spent
most of his time trying to improve the lives of
the disabled people. Jairos Jiri Association is
named after him. It was started in 1952. He
felt sorry for the disabled and discovered
that they needed skills that would earn
them a living. He turned part of his home
into a workshop. The people learnt how to
repair shoes and make things from leather.
There were blind, crippled deaf as well as
the dumb people. Nguboyenja Centre_in



--- Page 70 ---
fos. Jiri
i, Non-
been
panies
re are
ros Jiri
e the

8ulawayo marked the first Jairos Jiri centre. The centre started a school for young
handicapped people, a band and a choir too. He started to open other centers
Hecause the number of people increased. He opened some of the following
centres:

Sudy the table on Jairos Jiri Centres

il Home fordestitutes. crippledimen | Kwekwe:
and women. |
Naran Blind and deaf children Gweru
Betetats | (Children'withiliiéss of the mind= Harare
_ mentally handicapped "s
Mukuvadpasi Physically handicapped Rusape

The Association also has shops that sell craft work made by the disabled in
Gweru, Kwekwe, Victoria Falls, Bulawayo, Mutare, Zimunya and Harare. Jairos Jiri
nad very little education and started his working life as a herd boy, a gardener, a
cook, a bottle store worker, a shoemaker and a dishwasher. He died in his office
Sn 12 November 1982.

Exercise 1

i. a) Who started the Jairos Jiri Association?

b) When was he born?

c) Where did he start his first centre?

d) What kind of people did he train?

e) What was their main work?

Name four cities where some craft work are sold.
Name three jobs that Jairos Jiri did during his time.

. When did Jairos Jiri die?

How can we help disabled people? Give two answers.

Wi me wo

Sally Mugabe

Sarah Francesca Mugabe, also known as Sally Mugabe,
was the first heroine to be buried at the National Heroes
Acre. Born in Ghana in 1931, she died in Harare on
ganuary 27 1992. She died of a kidney ailment.

Mrs Mugabe's greatest and memorable contribution
2 Zimbabwe was her tireless devotion to improving the
welfare of children and underprivileged members of
society.She alsobecame the patronofMutemwaLeprosy
centre in Mutoko. She raised money and donations tas
‘or the centre and helped erase the society's stigma Sally Mugabe



--- Page 71 ---
hildren at heart and she assumed

associated with lepers. She had the needs of c
ring for the disabled to those

patronage of many children's centres from those cate
caring for orphans and children of ex-combatants. Ex-combatants are ex-soldiers.
Sally ensured that they had enough food. clothing and shelter. She also initiated
projects to rehabilitate prostitutes and became the Executive Chairperson of
the Child Survival and Development in Zimbabwe. In 1988 she established the
Child Survival and Development Committee for Zimbabwe with the assistance
from United Nations international Children's Education Fund (UNICEF). In 1989 she.

t Secretary of the United Zanu (PF) Women's. League as well

was elected the firs
as Secretary for Women's Affairs in the party's politburo. A politburo is a policy

making committee of a party, for example, ZANU (PF).

Exercise 2

Where did Sarah Francesca Mugabe come from?
Amai Mugabe contributed much to Zimbabwe. List three of the things that

she did.
She got assistance from UNICEF. What does the abbreviation stand for?
When was Amai Mugabe elected the first secretary of ZANU (PF)?
What was the cause of her death?

What is the name of the committee she es

Nr

tablished in 1989?

nar

Matthew Rusike Children’s home
The Matthew Rusike Children's Home Childcare was founded by the late REV.
Matthew Jacha Rusike who worked tirelessly for the benefit of the less priviledgec
children. Rev. Rusike helped the Methodist church to establish a home for orphanes
and vulnerable children in Epworth in 1960.

Matthew Rusike Children’s Home also works with people in the community to look

after orphans as well as vulnerable children.

St Giles Rehabilitation Centre
ilitation centre established in 1964. It offers services if
tional therapy. speech therapy, psychology and pediatrics
dicapped children.

it is a medical rehab

physiotherapy, ocCUpa
It also has a primary school for physically han

Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)
These organisations help in providing help needed by less privileged people. Ihe
organisations help the needy by providing equipment needed by such peop =
This could be paying school fees, buying textbooks, building schools, providi
food and providing skills for some particular jo

bs so that people are self-reliant.
There are a lot of non-governmental organisations in Zimbabwe. They all hea
different people in the society. One example is the Zimbabwe Albino Association —
it was formed on November 3 1996. The association helps people with albinism 9
finding ways and means O

f raising resources to provide for their needs.



--- Page 72 ---
umed
those
ildiers.
jiated
ion of
id the
fance
39 she
is well
policy

that

+ Rev,
dged
ianed

> look

tes in

Activity 2

In pairs

1. Complete the following table and answer the questions.

Name of organisation Type of people cared for
Matthew Rusike eee

Physically handicapped
Zimbabwe Albino Association _____ = Fs

2. and are examples of voluntary STGNSINONS:
3. Two examples of local voluntary organisations are
4. Give two examples of the work voluntary organisations give.

Church Organisations

These organisations help in providing help needed by the needy. They mobilise
resources to assist the needy in their communities by providing food, clothes,
school fees and even assisting at funerals and weddings.

Church organisations also provide health services for a very small fee, for example,
oranda hospital in Mt Darwin and Howard hospital in Chiweshe. They also take
part in community projects such as providing clean water through sinking boreholes
end various churches have schools that train people in technical subjects such as
@essmaking, capentry and welding.

Exercise 3

St Giles was established in 1964. [True/False]

Children with disabilities need care, just like other children. [True/False]
founded Matthew Rusike Children's Home.

Which centre offers physiotherapy?

Give an example of one non-governmental organisation in Zimbabwe.

Give one purpose of the Zimbabwe Albino Association.



--- Page 73 ---
6B. Local voluntary organisations that empower the
vulnerable and disadvantaged

Beneficiaries within communities

The beneficiaries of the voluntary service groups include the orphans, the disabled,
the elderly and the poverty stricken. These people are found in the community
and they need care and love just like everybody else as they are disadvantaged.

Orphans

HIV/AIDS has produced a number of orphans in the communities to such an extent
that some families are now child headed. In some homes, orphans look after ill and:
dying elders. Some of the orphans are denied the opportunity of going to schoo!
and they stay at home doing farm work and household chores. Many orphans
also drop out of school because of lack of money to pay fees. After realising that
these orphans need to be cared for, the different voluntary groups had to find
means and ways of helping them financially and materially.

Donations to an orphanage

Activity 3

1. Collect pictures of assistance provided by voluntary organisations to the
needy.

2. Dramatise orphans being ill-treated and getting help from voluntary
organisations.

3. List voluntary organisations taking care of orphans and the vulnerable in the
community.


--- Page 74 ---
Disabled

Mony people in different communities reject people with disabilities. Children
with disabilities have the same rights as other children. They have the right
% be safe, learn and develop as far as they can. They also need love and
communication. Because of such needs, they have been looked after by different
voluntary organisations.

1. List organisations that care for the disabled people.
2. Visit a voluntary organisation in your area.

The elderly
Old people need a lot of care. They need to be loved, they need food, materials
#5 use and a home to stay in. Some organisations have built some homes for the
oid people, for example, Entembeni Old People's Home and Ekuphumuleni in
Bulawayo.

Activity §

_ Use the internet to find out about old peoples’ homes and children’s homes
in the country.

Research on how Jairos Jiri established and managed his centres.
Visit an old people's home.

»
.

v Poor

There are people in the community who also need assistance to get social services.
Trey do not have any source of income and anything to use. These people also
need help for better living. These are the poor.

Activity 6

1. Suggest at least six ways of helping the poor.
. Ingroups, dramatise the way of life for the poor and the rich families.

_ List two beneficiaries from local voluntary organisations within communities.

. Give two sad things faced by some orphans in communities.

~ Children with disabilities have the same rights as other children. [True/False]

_ What do old people need from the community? Give two answers.

_ What do we call people who are able bodied but lack basic needs and need
assistance from voluntary organisations?



--- Page 75 ---
* Prominent people like Jairos Jiri and Sally Mugabe dedicated part of their lives
to helping the needy.

¢ In Zimbabwe there are a lot of NGOs that help the needy. One of them is the
Zimbabwe Albino Association.

¢ Various people and organisations work together with the government to
provide the needed social services to the needy people of the society through
voluntary work.

Summary
i |

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice test
1. Jairos Jiri's headquarters are in

A. Harare B. Bulawayo C. Mutare D. Zambia
2. Disabled people should .
A. not help in society B. be left out
C. be allowed to work D. not be loved
3. Mathew Rusike was a :
A. Farmer B. Reverend C. Butcher D. Builder
4. is c local organisation.
A. AU B. UN C. Jairos Jiri D. FAO
5. Sally Mugabe was the 1* female to be laid at National Heroes Acre.

A. patron B. hero C. heroin D. nurse.
6. Sally Mugabe was the patron of

A. Matthew Rusike Children's home

B. Jairos Jiri association

C. Mutemwa Leprosy Centre

D. Karanda hospital

7. In which way did Mathew Rusike help the needy?

A. Founded a home for the disabled.
; B. Founded a Children's home.
C. Founded the Red Cross.
D. Founded a home for mentally ill people.
What are voluntary organisations?
A. Organisations which help people free of charge.
B. Organisations which let people pay for their upkeep.
C. Organisations which look after the rich people.
D. Organisations which give food to the poor only.
9. Two national voluntary organisations in Zimbabwe are and
Jairos Jiri Association and Matthew Rusike Children's Home
UNICEF and UNHCR
WHO and DDF
Matthew Rusike and Mother Theresa

&

GOP>



--- Page 76 ---
lives
ithe

t to
ugh

10. Which group of people need constant help from others?
A. theaged 8B. therich  C. the teens D. the mothers

Structured questions

Jairos Jiri Association was named after whom?
Name two cities where craft work is sold?
Jairos Jiri's headquarters are in
How old was Jairos Jiri when he died?
How can we help disabled people?
Give two groups of people who need assistance in Zimbabwe.
In which way did Matthew Rusike help the needy in Zimbabwe?
When was the late Amai Sally Mugabe elected the first secretary of ZANU
(PF)?
) Nametwoofthe things that AmaiSally Mugabe contributed to Zimbabwe.
When was St Giles Rehabilitation centre established?
Name three things church organisations do for the poor.
The beneficiaries of voluntary organisations are
and ‘

G group of people organised for'a. common purpose..
children who' whose parents are dead.

dene willingly and not that you are forced to do it. Done
without payment.



--- Page 77 ---
Natural heritage: Production, distribution and
consumption of goods and services

Topic

7

Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:
1. identify productive sectors

2. describe activities in the productive sectors
3. state sources of family income

4. list family expenditures

5. compile a family monthly budget

6. state the importance of banking

7. identify different methods of banking.

Flashback

1. List all the natural resources you know.
2. Discuss how natural resources are conserved.
3. Discuss people’s activities that destroy natural resources.

Key words

budget consumption income deficit

Introduction

Zimbabwe's economy is based mainly on agriculture but also has strong mining,
fishing, tourism, manufacturing and forestry sectors. In this unit we will look at
Zimbabwe's productive sectors. The activities in the productive sectors include
growing, harvesting, processing and marketing. We will also look at family incomes,
expenditure, budgeting and banking.

7A. Productive sectors in Zimbabwe

Agriculture

Agriculture refers to the growing of crops and keeping of animals either for
consumption or for commercial purposes. Consumption is the act of using a
product instead of selling it. Agriculture is the backbone of the lives of the people

Haqee



--- Page 78 ---
of Zimbabwe. This is the most important productive sector in the country. It
contributes greatly to the economy of the couniry. The agricultural sector employs
many people, both formally orinformally. It also contributes to the country’s foreign
currency earnings through exports. Crops like tobacco and cotton are sold to
other countries, hence, bring foreign currency to Zimbabwe. From this sector, large
quantities of raw materials are sent to the manufacturing indusiries. For example,
cotton is sent to ginneries for weaving into cloth and sugarcane is sent to sugar
refineries where sugar is produced. Sugarcane is also used to produce ethanol.

Farming Regions in Zimbabwe

There are five natural farming regions in Zimbabwe. The regions are as a result of
temperatures, type of soil and amount of rainfall received in an area. This means
*at the rainfall and temperatures in a region influence the farming activities of
moat area or region. Regions 1, 2. and 3 are mostly suitable for commercial farming
ond cash crops are grown there. Regions 4 and 5 are the dry areas in the country
where intensive livestock production is done. Most peasant farming is practiced
mH regions 4 and 5. In these areas peasant farmers grow drought resistant crops
ike sorghum, millet or rapoko, These are usually referred to as small grains. Crops
ike sugar cane, which favour high temperatures, are also grown through irrigation
schemes.

Subsistence farming

Subsistence farming is done by most people in rural areas. It is hand to mouth
*arming. The crops grown are mainly food ‘crops and the people grow crops
ond rear animals mainly to feed their families. The litle extra food crops and
animals are sold to neighbours so as to meet their family needs. Crops grown are


--- Page 79 ---
mainly food crops like maize, groundnuts,
rapoko, maize, sorghum, round nuts as
well as cowpeas. Animals kept include
goats, sheep, cattle and chickens. Simple
tools like ploughs pulled by oxen, hoes
for weeding, cultivators and scotch carts
are used in the agricultural practices.
This is known as peasant farming and
the farmers are referred to as peasant
farmers.

Commercial Agriculture

Commercial agriculture can be referred
to as agro-business. The production of
crops or animals is mainly for sale. Large
quantities of wheat, maize, bananas,
oranges, cotton or tobacco are grown
and sold at national or international
markets. Commercial agriculture is
practised mainly in regions 1 and 2. Big
heavy machines are used. The machines
include tractors, harrows, combine
harvesters as well as overhead sprinklers.

Commercial agriculture

In groups, discuss farming activities in your community.
Draw the map of Zimbabwe, showing the main farming regions.

List three main crops grown in commercial farming.

What type of agriculture is practiced at your home?

Name three animals you find on a commercial farm.

What is the difference between subsistence and commercial farming?
List two advantages and the disadvantages of subsistence farming.
Write two advantages and disadvantages of commercial farming.

List three machines used in commercial farming.



--- Page 80 ---
Diamond / Coal
Mining is the process of extracting minerals from the earth. Dating back to the

16" century, Zimbabwe has been very blessed with minerals. Portuguese records
of the 16" century show that traders obtained a lot of precious minerals from the

_ Mutapa State. In actual fact, Zimbabwe was colonised because the colonisers

wanted minerals, especially the gold. Minerals mined in Zimbabwe include gold,
copper, tin, diamonds, iron ore. coal and phosphate among others. Most of the
minerals in the country are exported andin turn bringin good foreign currency.

Bmbabwe has a lot of mineral deposits. There is a rock feature that cuts across
2 country with a lot of mineral deposits like gold. The feature is called the Great
Gyke and it runs for about 530km. The dyke divides the Highveld into two halves.

Activity 2

Jsing the internet, research mining in Zimbabwe and fill in the table that follows.

Mineral Where is it mined?
Coal  Hwange a
Phosphate Dorowa
Diamonds

Gold

= Bikita

Nickel
Copper
Iron ore

Rshing

Zealand locked country, Zimbabwe relies on its inland water for fish production.
Wosi of Zimbabwe's fish comes from Lake Kariba. Most fishing in Kariba is done by
easants living along the lake shore. Some of the fish are dried while some are


--- Page 81 ---
sold fresh. The other inland dams and lakes also produce enough fish for
consumption to surrounding communities.

Tourism

Tourism has become very popular these
days. Who would not like to be a tourist?
Many people come from different countries
to see places of interest in the country
and they are called international tourists.
Tourists from other countries bring foreign
currency into the country. The places of
interest include Great Zimbabwe, Victoria
Falls, Hwange National Park, Lake Kariba
as well the Eastern Highlands of Zimbabwe Victoria Falls
where the great Nyangani Mountain, Vumba and Chimanimani mountains are
found.

Forestry

Zimbabwe's forestry industry is based mainly on exotic trees such as pine,
eucalyptus as well as wattle. There are also indigenous woodlands which take:
long to grow. These include teak, mahogany, amarula as well as mukwa in Shona
and umvagazi in Ndebele. Zimbabwe is self-sufficient in sawn timber. However,
in rural areas where wood is a fuel and also used for building, there is a
problem of deforestation. The 1*Saturday of December has been set aside for
tree planting. This is done so as to promote tree planting and to create awareness
for the importance of trees.

1. Arrange for a school visit fo some of the tourist attraction centres.
2. Organise a field trip to any productive centre nearby, could be a farm
or a mine.

Exercise 2

List three tourist attraction places in Zimbabwe.

Give four examples of minerals mined in Zimbabwe.

What is Zimbabwe's main cash crop?

Which day is set apart for tree planting?

Mountains in the eastern highlands are , and
Most farmers in rural areas are .

What is the importance of the tourism industry to the country?

NAOOPWN >



--- Page 82 ---
vever
tis a
de for
‘eness

farm

pine,
| jake
jhona

People get money or income for everyday use from different sources. Income iS
‘money that is earned. Money is required for different purposes in life. For effective

use of money, a budget is required. A budget refers to the planned use of
‘money. Expenditure is money that is used by the family.

There are a number of ways of earning an income. Some people are employed
fémmally hence their money comes from their employers. The formal sector
‘cludes the civil service, parastatals, some private companies and also some
‘@on-governmental organisations. Some people are self-employed, hence, they
s=t their money from selling their produce, for example, from selling garden

“Bfops or poultry projects. Other people engage in vending and earn a living that

. Others earn a living from small businesses including the cross borders who

serely practice buying and selling. Another group is that of peasants who rely on
asantry farming. There are also business people who get their money from the
inesses they run.

Activity 4

7. In pairs, write the differentways people in your area get money.

Suppose someone gave you $50.00, what would you do with it?

ran urban one.
‘Compare your home needs with your income.

Visit a local bank and find out ways which can enable one to get a loan to
start a project to earn money.

in groups, make a family monthly budget. State whether it's for a rural family

Expenditure

=xpenditure is the act of spending or using money. Different families have different
ways of using their money. Expenditures differ in families due to a number of



--- Page 83 ---
factors. In rural areas, money is mainly used to buy much needed groceries like
sugar, cooking oil, soap. It is also used to pay fees for children, transport purposes,
buying clothes and any other needed items. In urban areas it is a bit different.
There are a lot of expenses. These include rentals, where you pay for where you
live, paying phone and water bills. Transport to and from work is needed as well
as to and from school. Any food is to be purchased hence their groceries need a
big share of their budget.

1. Tell others about your family expenditure.
2. Explain where most of your family money is needed.

Budgeting

A budgetis planned use of money at a certain period. For family incomes to sustain
families, budgets are needed and necessary. In most families, incomes are lower
than their wants or needs. A budget makes it possible for one fo manage his/her
money to maximum use. With a budget, one can properly plan for the use of his
or her money.

When making a budget there are certain things to consider. Firstly, there are basic
needs, like mealie-meal, salt, sugar or cooking oil which should always get the first
preference. Basic needs are necessities of life, hence should always be available.
Luxuries are considered depending on the availability of the money. Luxuries.
include drinks, cakes, sweets as well as cigarettes. If the income is not enough:
to meet the family needs then there is a deficit. A deficit is a shortfall of money.
lf amount earned is enough and leaves extra money then that is surplus. Usually:
the surplus is invested.

Complete the budget below:
[Home needs per month [Amount
Food — SS fe |
Rentals (Including eleciricity)
School feesoraccessories
Bus fare
Paying accounts for clothes
Incidentals
Total required
Amount earned
Difference/surplus



--- Page 84 ---
Bs like

DOSES,
erent.

re you
3s Well
eeda

iwstain
lower
nis/her

rot his.

basic
re first
lilable.
Jxuries
hough
yoney.
Jsually

Exercise 3

The planned use of money is called
Teachers, doctors or the police are all in the formal sector. [True/False]
What is the main difference between basic needs and luxury needs?

Write two important things paid for by people in urban areas .

if a family's income is lower than their needs then they are said to be having
o budget

Give two ways in the informal sector which are sources of family incomes.

| 7C. Banking

@mportance of banking

& bank is an important institution for keeping people’s money safely and paying
Bout ona client's request. Names of different banks in Zimbabwe include Agri-
‘Bonk, Standard Chartered, Barclays, Cabs, Steward and many others. There is the
@eserve Bank of Zimbabwe which controls the working of the country's banks and
‘money. Most working people earn their salaries through banks. Banks. issue notes
Sd coins which are used as a medium of exchange by all consumers. A consumer
‘= c person who purchases goods and services for personal use. It is through a
‘Bonk that depositors and borrowers are connected. They create employment for
G&erent people. At times banks support agricultural development of the country
&y providing loans at a low rate to farmers. Banks also give out loans to people
#ho want to get big projects, only if they meet the bank's requirements.

Methods of banking

On wine Qanying,
—= =
=

“En ae
eh

Der the « counter banking ; Online banking

There are different methods of banking. The most common method is depositing
money over the counter. This is a bank transfer which involves direct deposit and
‘aihdrawal. There is also banking which has become very common in the country.
Tis type of banking is called online banking and under this type we also have
mobile banking. Mobile banking involves internet or mobile transfer of money.
Examples of this are eco-cash, tele-cash and one wallet among others. Banks also
use internet to do e-banking. They have come up with ways of making sure that
banking happens even at the comfort of a client's home.



--- Page 85 ---
1. Research on the importance of banking and different banking methods.
2. Tourlocal banks and find out the way they do things.
3. Role play over the counter and e-banking.

4. Listen as a resource person explains about banking.

Exercise 4

Write two uses of banks.
What is a budget?

The two forms of money are and

Define mobile banking.

Write two reasons why banks are important in a country.
How do banks support the agricultural sector?

Summary

* Zimbabwe's productive sector is mainly agriculture as it is also one of its foreign
currency earners. The productive sector also includes mining and tourism.
Tourism has also become very popular and a good foreign currency earner.

° Many families budget and spend their money as per family's earnings.

* Different banking methods help people access their money easily or purchase
what they want easily.

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

1. Most workers get their salaries from their employers through a
A. mobile phone B. card
C. deposit D. bank
2. What is the importance of the productive sector?
A, Many crops are grown.
B. Food crops and cash crops are grown.
C. Raw materials come from that sector.
D. There is a lot of work there.
3. Amineral used to make jewellery is
A phosphate 8B. coal C. iron
A, is the planned use of money.
A. Banking B. Budgeting C. Mobile banking 0D. Inflation
5. What are basic needs in a family budget?
A. Sugar, milk, mealie-meal, cooking oil and salt.
B. Rice and sweets.
C. All groceries.
D. Chocolates.

o

gold



--- Page 86 ---
6 What is Zimbabwe's chief cash crop?

A. Maize B, Rice C. Tobacco D. Groundnut
? The South African currency also used in Zimbabwe is the .
A. pula B. dollar C. rand D. kwacha
The bank which controls all the country's money is
A. Cabs B. Standard Chartered
C. Barclays D. the Reserve Bank

%. A utility paid for by people in urban areas that people in the rural areas do
not pay for is ‘
A. water B. groceries C. schoolfees 0D. transport

10. What are cross border traders? They are :
A. business women
B. people with businesses outside
C. people who buy goods from neighbouring countries and sellin Zimbabwe
D, those with many shops in towns

Structured Questions

(a) In which region do we find most commercial farms?

(b) Which cash crop is mainly grown in region 1 of the country?
(c) What are combine harvesters used for?

(a) Where are diamonds mined in Zimbabwe?

(5) What name is given to the rock feature that runs along the Highveld?

(c) What mineral is mined at Hwange?

(a) What does the term ‘landlocked' mean?

(6) Name the lake Zimbabwe heavily relies on for fish.

(c) Who does most of the fishing at Lake Kariba?

(a) Which two places attract tourists in our country?

(b) Why are tourists important to Zimbabwe?

Write two exotic trees found in Zimbabwe.

In any budget, what aspects does one look at?

Who does most of the fishing at Lake Kariba?

(a) Write one main difference between the budget of a rural family and
an urban family.

[5) What is the importance of keeping money in a bank?

(c) What is e-banking?

-— money earned.
— what comes out of something.



--- Page 87 ---
End of term two assessment test |

Multiple choice questions
1. The CRC specifies all the

A. laws B. children’s rights C. policies D. traditions
2. Children’s Rights Charter defines a child as being below .
A. 10 years B. 5 years Cc. 18 years D. 12 years

3. Which of the following shows civil rights and freedom?
A. Choosing religion of one’s choice.
B. Aname.
Cc. A balanced diet.
D. Passport or national identity card.
4. Children have the right to education but it is their responsibility to .

A. play B. ignore it
C. read and do homework D. avoid class
5. What is citizenship?
A. Living in a country. B. Belonging to a country.
C. Migrating to a country. D. Visiting a country.
6. Which one is a quality of good citizens?
A. Disloyal to their country.
B. Those who disrespect the constitution.
C. Defend their country.
D. Those who disrespect the flag
7. Abuse causes in the victim.
A. confidence B. respect
C. intelligence D. fear and confusion
8. Who faces abuse in the world?
A. Women only. B. Men only.
C. Children only. D. Men, women and children.
9, Which type of abuse involves one being beaten up?
A. Physical abuse. B. Sexual abuse.
C. Mental abuse. D. Verbal abuse.
10. A Peace Order is a form of gender based protection document protecting
one from ‘
A. lack of food B. physical abuse
C. the good life D. love
11. The CEDAW eliminates all forms of discrimination against ‘
A. men B. animals Cc. women D. birds
12. Which traditional practice violates women's rights?
A. Gender. B. Abuse.
C. Virginity testing. D. Rape.

|

&
oe a ee ee

y

i


--- Page 88 ---
fing

=3. What is human trafficking?

4. Identify any sex difference women have that men don't.

A. Beard B. Deep voice

C. Breasts D. Muscles
‘5S. Police forces have the duty to

A. arrest whoever they want B. maintain peace and order
_ C. perform illegal acts D. practice corruption
14. Heritage sites help the country earn

A. praise B. foreign currency

C. respect D. competition

C. tourists D. visitors
. Where is the Great Zimbabwe found?

A. Bulawayo B. Masvingo C. Harare D. Chinhoyi
- Inyanga mountains are foundin__.

A. Masvingo B. Mutare C. Gweru D. Nyanga
. Khami Monuments are found near __

A. Harare B. Gweru C. Bulawayo D. Chinhoyi
. The Chinhoyi Caves are located km west of Chinhoyi.

A. 20km B. 15km C. 25 km D. 10km
. Heritage sites hold a value for the local people.

A. cultural B. social C. significant D. economic
. The Heritage sites have helped create for the local people.

A. employment 8B. food C. shelter D. protection
. Heritage sites foretell the of the country to the young.

A. culture B. history C. belief D. future
. Igloos are built by .

A. San people B. Egyptians

C. Shona people D. Eskimos
. An igloo is built of

A. cement bricks B. stones

C. sun dried bricks D. ice blocks

is material used to build a hut.

A. Grass B. Leaves C. Tiles D. Asbestos
. The Tonga build their huts on because of floods and wild animals.

A. land B. silts C. boats D. trees
. Which shelter is found in a desert?

A. Hut B. Igloo C. Tent D. Pyramids

A. Buying and selling of women and children for sexual exploitation.
B. Movement of women and children to different countries.

C. Humans moving from one place to another.

D. Using various forms of transport to travel.

- People who visit a country for site viewing or holidays are called
A. neighbours B. passersby



--- Page 89 ---
30. A factor that influences the type of shelter is
A. tradition B. climate

C. language spoken D. available manpower

31. Why are most round huts in rural areas thatched with grass? It is because

A. that is what people like
B. grass is cheap and easy to get for people in rural areas
C. people in rural areas do not like zinc or asbestos
D. it rains in rural areas
32. Which organisation deals with disabled people?
A. Matthew Rusike Children's Home
B. St Giles Rehabilitation Centre

C. Jairos Jiri
D. World Vision
33. When was Jairos Jiri association started?
A. 1990 B. 195] C. 1930 D. 1952
34. The Jairos Jiri association owns shops that sell made by disabled people.
A. televisions B. food C. craft D. gadgets
35. One heroine buried at the Heroes Acre is .
A. Betty Matfi B.. Ishewokunze
C. Sally Mugabe D. Mama Mafuyana
36. Sally Mugabe was originally from __.
A. Zimbabwe B. Ghana
C. Botswana D. Brazil
37. In which year did Sally Mugabe establish the Child Survival and Development
Committee?
A. 1960 B. 1975 C. 1980 D. 1988
38. Matthew Rusike Children’s Home aims at taking care of .
A. women B. men C. oldpeople OD. orphans
39. Who benefits from voluntary services groups?
A. Elite B. Poor C. Working class D, Intelligent
40. Which disease has produced a large number of orphans in communities?
A. Cancer B. Cholera C. HIV/AIDS D. Typhoid
4]. Ekuphumuleni is a home for the .
A. orphans B. old C. disabled D. blind

42. A voluntary organisation is an .
A. organisation which helps people free of charge
B. organisation which lets people pay for their upkeep
C. organisation which looks after the rich people
D. organisation which gives food to the poor only
43. Zimbabwe's productive sector is mainly __.
A. tourism B. mining C. agriculture  D. trading
44. How many farming regions are in Zimbabwe?
A, 4 B. Cc. 10 D. 5



--- Page 90 ---
. In which regions is livestock production done?

A.

A.

A.
B.

Cc.

7. Which mineral is used to make jewellery?

gold B. copper C. zinc D. coal

. Zimbabwe's dominant cash crop is

tobacco B. wheat C. groundnuts OD. fice

. Abasic family budget involves

clothes and shoes
sugar, salt, medlie meal, cooking oil and meat
drinks and cereal

D. grapes and apples

A.

Q)
b)
Cc)
q)

Q)
b)

Cc)
d)

Cc.

. Where do people keep their money?

In the kitchen. B. Their backyard.
Bank. D. With friends.

Structured Questions

What is a right?
CRC stands for .
List at least three groups of child rights.

Give the difference between civil rights and freedom and basic

health and welfare rights.
What is a citizen?

What is the difference between a citizen by birth anda

citizen by registration?

Identify any five qualities of a good citizen.

The constitution of Zimbabwe explains that every citizen has a
right to and

What is abuse?

List any four types of abuse.

What is the difference between gender and sex?

Identify and explain any three types of gender based protection.
List at least four types of gender based violence.

What is human trafficking?

What is the duty of a police officer?

Besides maintaining peace and order, what other role do the
police officers play in the country?

List any two heritage sites in Zimbabwe.

What are the advantages and importances of having heritage
sites?

Where does the name Zimbabwe come from?
Which mountain is said to be sacred in Zimbabwe?

A. 1 and 2 B. 2and3 C. 3 D. 4and5
. Subsistence farming is farming for

A. business B. family consumption

C. trading D. money



--- Page 91 ---
Which shelter is suitable for areas with flooding and wild animals? (1)
Why do people in the desert use tents as shelter? (1)
What is an earthquake and which type of shelter is suitable for an area
with earthquakes?

An igloo is built using . (1)
List at least three voluntary organisations which target vulnerable people
in Zimbabwe. (3)
Who are the vulnerable people in the community? (1)

) In which town was Jairos Jiri centre first built? (1)

What kind of materials made by disabled people are sold by Jairos Jiri
Association? (2)

) Name any two people who had a passion to help the less privileged in

the society.

) How did Sally Mugabe help the Mutemwa Leprosy Centre

in Mutoko?

_ What does UNICEF stand for?
) Who benefits from local voluntary organisations?

Agriculture is the most productive sector in Zimbabwe. [True/False]
What benefits does the country get from agriculture?

Give at least three.

In which region is commercial farming practiced?

_ What are the advantages of having minerals in a country?

What is a budget?

Why is budgeting important?

Why do people keep their money in banks?

Identify any two methods of banking practiced nowadays.



--- Page 92 ---
Transport and communication

objectives

the end of the lesson you should be able to:
* outline the development of means of transport and communication

© examine indigenous and modern means of transport and communication
2 explain the importance of modern transport and communication

4 identify goods transported by road, rail, air and sea

= evaluate the current modes of transport

& list major road ports, seaports and airports linked to Zimbabwe

7. locate major seaports and airports on a map

= identify various communication systems

%. describe the appropriate use of communication systems.

Hashback

a) Using the internet. find pictures of different modes of transport.
b) paste them ona manila paper and name each one.
7 in groups, talk about different ways of communicating with friends

Key words.

transport communication mode

introduction

Transport is a means of travel or movement from one place to another. It includes
*e public and private movement of people and goods. On the other hand,
communication is the act of passing information or messages from one person to
snother. There is movement in both transport and commu nication. So transport and
sommunication go hand in hand. For information to be passed then transport is
sequired. Also, goods are to be transported there should be some communication.
Transport and communication are an important part of our day to day life.



--- Page 93 ---
8A. Development of transport and communication

Transport

Means of transport

Dating back to the Stone Age, people in Zimbabwe travelled from one place to
another on foot. They carried their goods on shoulders, heads or on backs. Later
on they turned to their animals. They used backs of donkeys or horses. After some
time, they used sleighs or sledges pulled by animals. This was then followed by the
wheel. The introduction of the wheel brought in ox-wagons, scorch-carts, bicycles
as well as cars. The wheel travelled on prepared roads.

In Zimbabwe, the first gravel roads were constructed in 1920. Next came strip
roads in 1933 and full tarred roads came into effect around 1949. This has led to
our tarred roads today.

James Watt around 1760 developed a steam engine. In Zimbabwe, the first railway
lines were built in 1897. These were built by Rhodes’ men from South Africa. Rhodes
wanted a railway line which ran from Cape Town in South Africa to Cairo in Egypt.

After cars and trains came air travel. The first aeroplane flight was successfully
carried out by the Wright brothers in 1903. Today a lot of travelling and ferrying of

goods is done by air.

vat



--- Page 94 ---
hce te
, Later
fsome
by the
cycles

le strip
led to

gilway
hhodes
Egypt.
assfully
fing of

unication

wy
mv

=

=

=
=
=
=
a=

mons of communication

communication, man first used smoke or sound of drums as a way of
@jassing different messages. Rising smoke could call people to the chief's court.
Seating of drums in a special way could mean the death of someone. Blowing
@ the horn was also used for communication. At times, a messenger could be
S=nt by word of mouth. All this was followed by the use of letters, telepnones and
Segrams. Today the use of fax, e-mails, computers, internet or satellites have
Gone into use. The most recent ways of communicating through the internet,

madile phones and computers include facebook, twitter and whatsapp. The new
sys of communication are fast and efficient.

Exercise 1

1. Name two ways that people used to communicate long ago.
2 List three ways of modern transport used today.

3. State one disadvantage of traditional ways of communication.
t State one advantage of modern transport.

. Name one device that can be used to communicate with a lot of people at
the same time.

indigenous means of transport

Mdigenous means of transport in Zimbabwe include donkeys, cows and carts.
These were used long back. People would use donkeys and cows to carry heavy



--- Page 95 ---
luggage on their back. After some time they designed a cart that was pulled by
donkeys or cows. Both people and the luggage could be carried on the cart.
People would travel long distances for days. After travelling for a distance they
would rest on their way and continue later until they reached were they were
going. However, indigenous transport was much cheaper to use and itis still being
used in Zimbabwe especially in the rural areas.

Modern means of transport

The modern means of transport include boats, cars, buses, trains, motor bikes and
aeroplanes. Modern transport improved the efficiency in travelling or transporting
goods and people. It is faster than the indigenous transport. Some take more time
depending on the distance they are travelling and the goods being transported.
For example, a ship or boat will take months to travel to some countries because
they are slow but transport huge items such as cars. They make it easier for countries
to import and export goods. Aeroplanes are very reliable as people can now fly
to different places in a short space of time. In everyday life we use either of the
transport to go to work, school and travel to other towns. As much as modern
transport is available, it is expensive to acquire and maintain. It costs so much to.
buy and to fuel it.

Indigenous communication

Long ago people used to communicate using smoke. People would go to higher
places, such as mountains to make a fire. This would alert people around that
there was a massage being communicated. They also used to beat drums. The
drum was beaten in different ways to communicate different messages. During
the hunting and gathering, the iron aged people would paint the rocks to left
people know the animals that were found in the area. Rock painting was used
to communicate with other people. The indigenous type of communication was
mainly effective for people living very close to each other. People were forced ta
stay close to each other so as to make communicating easier.

Modern communication

This was seen as a relief to people because they are able to live far away from
each other but can still communicate. People started using letters, telephones, fax
and email. Letters were easily sent to the post office and they could be carried by
cars to the next town or village. A person would receive a letter from the postman.
Later people started using phones, the fax and emails. This improved the efficiency
of communication. People can now speak to each other and give feedback ai
the same time.

Importance of modern transport and communication
¢ Help in trade. Some countries require resources which are not found in their

country, for example, gold.



--- Page 96 ---
lled by
e cart.
€ they

were
being

es and
porting
fe time
dorted.
#CQUSE
iuntries
iow fly
of the
jodern
luch to

higher
jd that
ns. The
During
3 to let
is usec

‘ced te

ty from
ves, fax
ned by
istman-

ciency

yack aF

in their

on Was

* The transportation of technology has become easier as countries can use
better technology from other countries.

* Goods can be transported in and outside the couniry and also around the

country from one city to another.

People can travel from one place fo another.

They shorten distance between places.

In agriculture, perishables can reach their destination while fresh.

People easily share ideas.

People can now get informed in a short space of time.

8B. Transportation of goods

Transport is very important in people's lives today. Goods are carried from areas
2f production to those of consumption. Goods are transported from areas with
Surplus to those with a deficit of the particular goods. People are able to move
om one place to another in search of jobs, education and any other emergency
® life through transport facilities.

| Modes of transport

There are different modes of transport that are used to transport goods. These
elude air, rail, road and water.

Modes of transport

Activity 1

What mode of transport would you use?
(a) To go to your friend's house which is 500 metres away from your place.
({b) To visit a relative 200 km away from your house.



--- Page 97 ---
(c) To take perishable goods like milk, fruits and vegetables from farms

to towns and cities.

2. Use the internet to find out the advantages and disadvantages of various
modes of transport.

Research: Visit Traffic and Safety Council/Police station and find out what

can be done to reduce road accidents in the country.

Goods and modes of transport

Mode of transport Goods transported

Road cars, farm produce, groceries

Rail | Reavy goods such as furniture, minerals
Air flowers, farm produce

Water TT oil, Cars, furniture :

Activity 2

Copy and Complete the table below.

Road Farm produce, for example; Big trucks and lorries
tobacco 'to auction floors, |
vegetables fo market orto:cities

Railway

Air
Water

Roads

Roads play an important role in the transport system. In Zimbabwe, road is the

most common mode used because it is accessed by nearly everyone in every

part of the country, whether rural or urban. For example:

* {tis by road that we reach railway stations, airports and seaporis.

* Roads connect rural areas to urban areas.

* Roads connect towns, cities and neighboring countries.

° — Itis by roads that door to door services are accessed by means of cars, buses,
motor-bikes or trucks.

* tis by roads that all our farm produce are taken to markets or fo manufacturers.



--- Page 98 ---
ays

Railways are the cheapest mode of transport by which thousands of people
an travel from one corner of the country to another for different purposes,
fr example, business, education and visiting friends and relatives. People of all
come groups can travel by train as it has different types of compartments like
general, sleeper and many others. Goods irains carry goods like coal, cement,
feod grains, fertiliser and petroleum from industries to areas of consumption,
Passenger trains and goods trains travel on a railway line.

Water

om olden days till now, water has been an important means of transport. It is
very useful in transporting very heavy and bulky goods. A ship can carry fonnes
nd tonnes of goods at a time. Goods like petroleum and its products can be
onsported easily across continents. Ships, boats and submarines all take off or
ad at a seaport or harbour at a coast of an ocean or sea.

I
babwe is a landlocked country, hence, uses seaports of neighbouring countries
= move its exports and imports. Beira is the nearest seaport to Zimbabwe. In
ibabwe, boats are seen mainly in Kariba Dam.

si is the fastest means of transport. By air, one can reach a destination quickly
Shout congestion of any other means of transport. Air transport is free from
wface hindrances like mountains, forests or flooded rivers. It connects countries of
Serent continents making the world a global village. It is suitable for transporting
wis, vegetables, flowers or high value goods like drugs or machines. It is useful
ames of disasters, for example, in floods or in wars. However, it is very expensive
sace out of reach for the common man. Aeroplanes land or take off at airports
Ncifies or towns.

Exercise 2

What mode of transport would be used to transport fresh flowers to the United
Kingdom?

What mode of transport would be used to transport cars from Japan to
Durban in South Africa?

What mode of transportis used by cotton farmers to carry their cotton
from farms to cotton ginneries?

Write one advantage of the railway transport over the road transport.

What mode of transport is used to get to airports or seaports?

Name airports you know in the country?

What problems are met in areas where there are poor roads?



--- Page 99 ---
» UE Fao hay
7

Key

@ Copitai + Airport
@ MajorTowns © Seapart

=— Primary Road
=" National Boundary — Rallwoy

A map showing airports of Zimbabwe and sea ports linked to Zimbabwe

Study the table below.

Victoria falls | Mozambique port Beitaand'Mapute: a
Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo South Africa port Durban and port Elizabeth

Robert/Mugabe International Fl

Locate and name the sea ports linked to Zimbabwe and airports of Zimbabwe
shown on any map of Southern Africa.

8C. Responsible use of communication systems

Communication is a system of carrying or passing messages from one person to
another. Through communication people exchange thoughts, ideas and information.

There are different types or means of communication in place now. People
communicate with each other by letters, telephones, cell phones, newspapers,



--- Page 100 ---
Magazines, radios, televisions, computers and also satellites. Messages can also
Se sent through telegrams, facsimile machine (fax) or emails. In fact, the choice
oF Communication depends on purpose .

Postal communication can be classified into two parts, postal service and
telephone service. Postal service is now an old means of communication. It
includes letters, money orders, parcels and postal service schemes. Telephone
Services have proved to be very important and widely used in today's world.
They are quick and affordable.

At times, information can be communicated to a very large number of
people. This is called mass media or mass communication. These include radios,
televisions, newspapers, books, magazines and satellite Communication.

New Communication Technologies

_ There is a revolution of technology. These include internet, whatsapp, facebook
=mail, fax, video conferencing, twitter and skype.

* communication systems are used effectively they support personal and country
Sevelopment. Through the new technology, communication is fast, instant and
fable. The new technologies have some negative effects like causing addiction
8nd teaching children pornography. Communication systems like Facebook are
bal. This means that they are used by people from around the world. Murderers,
*apists, kidnappers and other dangerous people also use these systems. If children
use these without parental guidance they may communicate with dangerous
| Beople.

‘Activity 4

earch
>theinternettofindtheadvantagesand disadvantages ofnewcommunication
=chnologies.

List two means of communication from the past.
Give three examples of mass media.
A suitable type of transport to carry school learners going for sports to a
country overseas is ‘
Which mode of transport is suitable for transporting perishable goods from
one country to another?

=. Name one thing that can be transported by the fastest mode of transport?



--- Page 101 ---
Summary :

_ The best reason air transport is better than other means of transport is ,

Transport developed from animal to air while communication developed from
smoke signal to satellite. The modes of transport include waiter, road, rail and
air.

All the transport systems in the world use these modes.

In other countries there has been massive development in the communication
and technology industry.

There has been great development in the communication systems on internet
communication platforms such as whatsapp, google, twitter and many others.

End of topic assessment test |

Multiple choice questions

is a mode of transport used by cars, buses, trucks and lorries.
A. Water B. Vehicles C. Wheels D, Road
Which form of transport is used commonly to deliver goods in city centres
and around rural farming areas?
A. Air B. Water C. Railways D. Road
The fastest means for transporting goods and passengers is
A. bus B. intercontinental highways
Cc. train D. aeroplanes
is a modern way of communication.
A. Smoke B. Drum C. Horn D. Email
When communicating with someone in South Africa, you can use
A. drums B. paintings C. telephone D, railway

A. itshuge size B. itis faster C. goodseats D. safety

The most expensive form of transport is

A. an aeroplane B. acart

C. the railway D. road transport

Which airport is found in Zimbabwe?

A. Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo airport B. Zambia

C. Limpopo River D. Mozambique
Zimbabwean trade is best served by ports in .

A. Zambia and Namibia B. Tanzania and Zambia

C. West Africa D. South Aftica and Mozambique

. Why are roads important in remote rural areas of the country?

Because roads .
A. are good B. make people like to travel
C. are safe D. help in the development of an area


--- Page 102 ---
itres

Structured questions

The mode of transport that is suitable for water locked countries
is

What is the best mode of transport used by farmers or shop owners
to deliver their goods?

Why can't farmers use the railway system to transport their tobacco
to auction floors?

Write one formal way of using letters today?

Why is it important to keep all public phones working?

How did people from long ago communicate?

Write one problem faced by people travelling on a train.

What mode of transport would be used to transport perishable foods to
Britain?

Write one advantage of the new communication systems.

Why is communication necessary and important to people?

What modern discoveries make people communicate globally?

Apart from phoning or receiving calls, what are fhe other functions
of a cell phone?

Write three modes of transport you know.

Which old means of transport is used by people in the remote rural
areas?

Write two factors which influence the choice of how we travel.

What do the following ships ae

(i) Passenger ship

(ii) Cargo ship

Write two seaports used for Zimbabwean trade.

What goods are normally carried by ships from continent to continent?
How would a car bought from Japan be transported to Zimbabwe?
Write two ways in which people communicated long ago.

Which is the fastest means of transport?

Write two uses of a computer.

Write four modes of transport you know.

What means of transport is best for transporting bulky goods over long
distances?

The mode of transport used by cars, trucks and buses is

Glossary

Satellite =~

is the latest means of communication which enables passing
of information across allinations of the world.



--- Page 103 ---
Work and leisure
Topic

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:
1. identify ways of creating employment in Zimbabwe

2. identify work and leisure activities in the past and present
3. describe appropriate leisure activities.

. In groups, discuss why people need to work and the different kinds. of
work people do at home.

2. \dentify people who have done well in sports.and art in Zimbabwe.

3. In pairs, talk about what you do during your leisure times.

Key words

indigenisation industrialisation

Introduction

For anyone to live a successful life they have to work. However, after work there is
need to relox, rest and refresh. When you rest you will be able to work again the
following day. Even God, the creator of the universe, rested on the seventh day
after working for six days. Work and leisure go hand and hand.

9A. Employment creation in Zimbabwe

People are employed so as to get money to earn a living. Therefore, the
government does a number of things so as to create employment for its citizens.
This is meant to help people earn a living and to stop the movement of people
from one place to another looking for employment, especially to other countries
like South Africa. The government also introduces and helps fund cooperatives
and irrigation schemes so as to create and sustain employment.



--- Page 104 ---
ent professions (Occupations)

Doctor Builder Lawyer

Cooperatives can be formed and engage people in a number of projects. Projects
ake poultry, piggery, buying and selling, animal husbandry and many others can be
established. Training of people is key for cooperatives to be successful. Resources
ciso need to be provided so as to ensure success.

Functional irrigation schemes can be boosted by building more dams in
different areas and engaging people in all year round agriculture. A variety
of crops and vegetables can be grown and find their way to bigger markets
and supermarkets in towns for sale. Produce from irrigation schemes can also
be sold nationwide depending on the surplus.

. Tell others about any cooperative you know. Take note of the following
questions:
(a) What does the cooperative do?
(b) How many members does it have?
(c) How do the members work?
(d) Where do they sell their produce?

2. Find out more about other cooperatives and what they do.
3. Talk about industries and what they produce.
4, Use the internet to find out how to establish a cooperative.



--- Page 105 ---
Indigenisation is another way of creating employment. Local people own
companies and employ many local people. Processing and registering companies
is made easy and accessible fo many ordinary people.

Industrialisation is also another way in which industries are established in many
areas and accessed by local people. The Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio Economic Transformation (Zim Asset) 2013-2018 was developed for that.
It helps to create employment in the country. The aim is to add value to our
abundant natural resources. People are encouraged not to sell products in
their natural state only but add value so as to create employment around the
processing cycle. For example, instead of just selling maize, people can process if
into different snacks. That way more people are employed. The case study below
shows this type of employment creation.

Case study
Farmer A grows corn. He has two full time labourers on the farm and hires 20
more on part time when its weeding and harvesting time. Hence Farmer A has
created 22 jobs.

He went for a value addition workshop and decided to produce popcom at his

farm. Farmer A employs 5 more labourers full time. He also regularly hires Driver
C to deliver his Maputi to the shops and wholesale. Farmer A has now employed

a total of 28 people, hence creating jobs.

an 2-e hei 2 ee el

Employment creation through adding value


--- Page 106 ---
Exercise 1

Why do people get employed?

jany is important for cooperatives to be successful.
Dole In order for people to engange in all year Agriculture they need
that. What is industrialisation?
our Value addition leads to
is in
‘the P .
ess it 9B. Work and leisure in the past and present
BOW

_ Work in the Past

Work has been there ever since people lived. The people of the pre-colonial era
worked very hard daily for their families’ upkeep. They had to make tools they
wanted to use in their search for food. The San where hunter-gatherers. Men
and boys of a certain age went out to hunt. Women and girls were engaged in
gathering fruits, preparing meals for their families and taking care of children.

The different ethnic groups did different kinds of work. As the staple diet was
mainly from crops like millet and sorghum, peasant farming was practised. People
started specialising in fields like blacksmith, farming, building and trading. They
were very good builders as most of our great famous ruins were built by them.
They also built big stone walled buildings such as Great Zimbabwe. The people
also engaged in mining. They mined minerals like gold, iron and copper. They then
traded with white foreigners for beads, cloths and bangles. They also engaged in
security matters through military training to protect their empires .

On the other hand,
women were engaged
inpottery and weaving.
They prepared meals for
their families. They took
care of children as well
as all the other family
members. Agricultural
activities were part of
their duties as well.



--- Page 107 ---
List ruins that you know and then say who built them.

Leisure in the past

All ethnic groups were engaged in leisure activities. There was a day set aside
every week just to relax and rest. This was called chisi/izilo. Grandmothers and
grandfathers were sources of educative folktales which taught children good
morals and manners. These stories were normally listened to whilst relaxing around
a fire at night.

Evenings were also the best times for traditional dances where there was singing
and beating of drums and any other entertaining activities. Among the Ndebele,
the dances included isitshikitsha and ingquzu, whilst the Shona did jerusarema
and mbakumba.

in the Ndebele state, ceremonies were conducted to celebrate the fertility of the
land. The first fruit ceremony, inxwala, was celebrated annually. The king officiated
this in his capacity as the political and religious leader of the state.

Games played an important part in the social life of the people. The traditional
games played included playing house (mahumbwe/amandiwane) hide and
seek (chinwande hwande/ umacatshelana) and many others. The games taught
children discipline, teamwork, self-reliance and trustworthiness. Swimming and
wrestling were games of great interest as well.

Activity 3

Write down a list of indigenous games you Know.
In groups, play some indigenous games you know.

1.
2
3. Talk about folktales you know and find their moral lessons.
4. Use the internet to find out about traditional games.

Work at present

There are different kinds of work which people do nowadays. The kind of work
one does depends on the level of education and skill one has. Most jobs require
a certain level of education and training in that field. Workers can be put into
different classes according to their level of education and training of a particular
job. Workers can be unskilled, semi-skilled or skilled.

ES 39QRRKR OH OFF

Li

Sa) &

am w“™Ss oy ¢e ras A


--- Page 108 ---
1. What do you do when you are free at home or at school?

2. What do parents do when they are free?

3. Watch a sporting game ona television. Tell your classmates about it.
4. Talk about the sporting activities below.

Exercise 2

List three work activities that were done in the past that we still do today.
List three classes of present day workers?
White collar jobs are done by which class of workers?
. What is leisure?
| . Give two activities you do in your leisure time.
Why is leisure important?

7C. Responsible use of leisure time

There are activities that are appropriate for leisure. These include playing different
games. Games help the mind and the body to relax and refresh. Games help
develop individuals’ health. Continuous playing of games leads to one
developing game skills which can make him/her turn into a professional.

However, there are certain leisure activities which are inappropriate, activities like
clubbing in bars or night clubs. Here people spend lots of money, take drugs,
misbehave and do all sorts of bad things. These activities may also lead youths to
Unwanted pregnancies, prostitution and many other bad behaviours.



--- Page 109 ---
Identify people who have become famous through sports. Create a chat with
their pictures and present it in class.

Research about people in sports and complete the table.

Name of person _ Sport

Peter Ndlovu _ Soccer _
Tatenda Taibyu ee
Elliot Mujaji ee
Charles Manyuchi —————— B
Benjani Mwaruwari

Summary

* Work and leisure are part of life.
* The government plays an important role in employment creation.
* Leisure helps one to relax. However, there are leisure activities which have

become work and give people income. Good examples are all the different
sporting activities.

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

Why do people do the work they do?
A. To occupy themselves.
B. To be good citizens.
C. To earn a living and serve their families and societies they live in.
D. To keep out of trouble.
Why do school children work in the school garden?
. It is child labour.
. Because they will be punished.
. To feel the work.
. To train them so that they are prepared for life and become useful to their
societies.



--- Page 110 ---
A dentist can be classified as .
A. semi-skilled B. skilled
C. unskilled D. a hard worker
4. If many people are unemployed what problems could be encountered in
the societies?
A. They do not like education.
B. Many people become teachers.
C. There will be a tise in crime rate and drug abuse.
D. More people get married.
5. A business jointly run by many people is a

A. company B. cooperative
C. irrigation scheme D. poultry business
6. Inthe San community, who did the hunting?
A. Men and women B. Only women
C. Only men D. Children
7. What are government workers called?
A. Semi-skilled B. Messengers
C. Civil servants D. Passenger
8. One form of leisure that is passive is
A. playing golf B. fishing
C. collecting coins D. watching a movie
9. What do leisure and recreational activities do to our bodies?
A. Grow big and old. B. Be tired and restless.
C. Relax and refresh. D. Be light and do work.
10. Leisure activities at school help learners .
A. learn B. develop body and mind

C. get tired D. hate school work

Structured questions

1. (a) Explain what work is?
(b) Why do people work?
(c) What type of work did early people do to earn a living?
2. (a) Write two weapons made and used by the San for hunting.
(b) What was the main work done by the San men?
3. (a) How were children occupied during their free times in the iron-age era?
(b) Of what importance were folktales to children and the community?
(c) What do most men in rural areas do during their free times?
4. (a) Ifa boy gets a gardening job, what type of worker is he?
(b) Write two ways of reducing unemployment in the country.
(c) State one advantage of being self-employed.
5. (a) What do primary school children do during their free times?
(b) What is leisure?



--- Page 111 ---


--- Page 112 ---
Global issues

Objectives

By the end of the lesson you should be able to:
1. list causes and effects of poverty in the community

suggest ways of reducing poverty in the community

discuss effects of HIV/AIDS on people athome, atschoolandin the community
identify types of pollution

state effects of pollution on the environment.

ARON

Flashback

1. Talk about natural resources. List them.
2. Discuss how to preserve the natural resources you listed above.

3 — Key words

fo globalissues poverty datum line absolute poverty pollution
relative povery.

Introduction

Poverty, HIV/AIDS and pollution are issues of concern to the whole world today.
These issues have been found to be major challenges the world is facing.
Zimbabwe as a nation has also been severely affected by these three issues.
Organisations have been set to try and come up with lasting solutions to these
challenges.

10A. Poverty

In Zimbabwe poverty is an issue of great concern. Many people do not have
enough or cannot afford decent three meals a day. Most families, both in rural
areas and urban areas, forgo other meals because they afford single meals daily.
According to Consumer Council of Zimbabwe (CCZ), most Zimbabweans are
poor. Many people earn money that is below the poverty datum line. A poverty
datum line is the standard of living that one must afford for them to be seen as
not poor. There are two types of poverty. There is absolute poverty and relative

poverty.



--- Page 113 ---
VAS OF wT

Poverty stricken children

Absolute poverty is when a group of people has nothing and cannot meet a
normal standard of living. The people in absolute poverty cannot afford the daily
meals, health services, proper housing. proper clothing and education.

Relative poverty is experienced by those with more but their earnings are below the
poverty datum line. They have something but cannot meet the normal standard
of living.

Activity 1

1. Find out which group of poverty most of the people in your area fall under.

2. What do you think are the causes of poverty in your area?
3. Use the internet to find out the causes of poverty and compare with those in
your area.

Causes of Poverty

Poverty is a bit complicated. It is caused by a range of reasons which work
together. The causes include joblessness, low pay or laziness. Also, inconsistent
rainfall has contributed to the poverty of the people of Zimbabwe as most people
rely on agricultural output. As most Zimbabweans depend on peasantry, the
inconsistences of rainfall have made people fail to produce anything for their
families. Therefore, drought is also a cause of poverty as there will be less quantities
produced in the agricultural sector.

in Zimbabwe unemployment is also the cause for poverty. Many people are
unemployed, hence have no income. Those employed in the formal sector earn
amounts below the poverty datum line. Those in the informal sector also find it



--- Page 114 ---
difficult because money in circulation is limited. Some people are just lazy, hence,
they cannot raise anything for their families.

Effects of poverty

When people are poor it means they cannot afford the decent three meals
a day or their everyday needs. This has a negative impact on people's lives. It
affects their health as they are unable to get healthy food because they cannot
afford it. They also cannot afford health services and this causes many illnesses
and pre-mature deaths, living many orphans behind. At school, parents fail to
raise the required levies, hence causing dropouts as well as negatively affecting
the learners' pass rate. Failure by many parents fo pay the required levies limits
many developments at a school.

However, there are measures by government to help those in absolute poverty
in the form of Basic Education Assistance Module (BEAM). Many people are poor
and the assistance at times is not enough for all who need it. Also, some non-
governmental organisations such as CAMFED and Plan International come in with
some help. A number of organisations have been trying to help reduce poverty
by providing food and health services to the indigenous people for free. These are
organisations like the United Nations, World Vision, World Health Organisation and
others.

In groups, discuss poverty.

2. Research and present on the causes and effects of poverty.
3. Listen asaresource person explains the number of ways of reducing poverty.

Exercise 1

What is poverty?
What are the three causes of poverty you know of?

Write two causes of unemployment in Zimbabwe.

How does poverty affect health?

What are the two ways of reducing poverty that you know?
Suggest one way people in your area can do to reduce poverty.

HaAkwWn™

10B. HIV and AIDS

HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus. HIV is the virus that causes AIDS. It
weakens the immune system which is the body's defense against illness or infection,
AIDS stands for Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome. AIDS is acquired, which
means that you get the disease from someone else. Immune means the body's

s2UsFSRQ

aA mraents TT


--- Page 115 ---
system for fighting off diseases and deficiency shows that there is a weakness in
that system. Syndrome is a collection of symptoms of diseases. AIDS then is the
final stage of a person's infection with HIV. When one is HIV positive it means the
person has been infected with HIV. Once infected with the virus there is no cure,
hence one will contract AIDS. People with AIDS take medicine called antiretroviral
which help to control the virus in their blood.

HIV and AIDS can affect population figures. Africa has a highrate of HIV infections,
hence many people die each year from AIDS. In Zimbabwe, the first case of AIDS
was detected in 1985. In 2000 to 2005, astrategic framework was putin place after
the 1999 HIV and AIDS national policy. However, in 2011, AIDS experts reported
that there was.a drop in HIV infections in Zimbabwe. This is because people have
been educated hence have changed their behaviour because they now know
more about the disease.

1. There are facts and myths surrounding HIV/AIDS, Research about them and

present your findings in class.
2. Listen to a resource personas they teach you about the virus and its effects
on families, schools and communities.

Effects of HIV/AIDS at home, school and community

There are many orphans and vulnerable children (OVCs) in the communities.
Child headed families have come into existence. For most families with HIV
patients, budgets have become strained trying to meet nutritional requirements
and getting treatments for patients. Discrimination within families and communities
because of the virus has led to family feuds and illtreatment of children and adults
with the virus. There are also lots of transfers in schools. When a child loses a parent
or parents, he/she is moved to live with a relative. Failure fo pay the required levies
by relatives has led to some orphans failing to attend school.

Exercise 2

What does HIV stand for?

What is discrimination?

Write two ways by which one. can contract HIV.

What are the effects of HIV and AIDS at home? Give three.

What are OVCs?

What are the effects of HIV and AIDS in the community? Give two.



--- Page 116 ---
10C. Pollution

To pollute is to make dirty. Pollution is dirtying or poisoning land, air or water.

Types of pollution

Water pollution

Water pollution

The different types of pollution include water, air, noise and land pollution. Water
that is polluted is not clean. Water can be polluted by different materials. Some
materials dissolve in the water and make it unsafe and unclean for domestic
purposes. These can be waste chemicals from industries, homes and schools.
There are some materials that do not dissolve in water yet they make it dirty. These
can be paper, plastic, tires and tin. Some of the water pollutants are harmful to
life. Polluted water can cause diseases like cholera, typhoid and dysentery. Oily
water may kill plants, animals and people. Also, if water is polluted by pesticides
or other chemicals it may kill animals like fish, frogs, crabs and any other animals.

Activity 4

1, List materials that dissolve in water.
2. How do people pollute water at home?
3. Using the internet, research on water pollution and its effects.



--- Page 117 ---
fuTtoorno @ «

Air Pollution

FOOT RON KIC YS

Air contains a lot of different gases. Gases that support living things include oxygen
and carbon dioxide. Smoke, dust and various gases pollute the air. Most polluting
gases cannot be seen and are odourless but very poisonous. Smoke from car
exhausts pipes, big companies, big burning fires all pollute the air. Polluted air
causes sickness as it affects lungs.

Activity 5

From the list below, choose items that pollute the air:

OONaO ER WN >

Black clouds of smoke from big industries
Smoking exhaust pipe of a caror a lorry
Smoke from boiling water

Smell from the pit latrine at home rn
Fog SCHOOL:
Dust

Smell from blooming flowers
Smoke from forest fires

A burning mosquito coil in the house.

AN i



--- Page 118 ---
Land pollution

Land pollution is the deposition of solid or liquid waste materials on land or
underground. Land pollution is one of the biggest problems the world is facing
today. Land pollution has become a major problem ever since the development
of industries. In actual fact, land pollution can be seen as the destruction of the
earth's surface as aresult of man's activities or their misuse of the land's resources.
Man's activities have destroyed natural habitats of the land.

. Go outside and pick up all the rubbish you see or find.
. Make alist of all the rubbish.

. Classify the rubbish into classes, for example, rubbish that decays and that
which does not.
. Talk about how the rubbish should be disposed of at school.

Types of land pollution

Land is polluted in different ways. Land is polluted by various kinds of rubbish
like paper, plastic containers, bottles, cans, waste food, used cars, broken furniture,
medicine bottles or any scrap materials. Rubbish that does not decay leads to
rubbish piles.

Farming activities also contribute in causing land pollution. Fertilisers are applied
to the soil. Also pesticides and other chemicals are added during the agricultural
process. These also affect and disturb the soil.


--- Page 119 ---
Deforestation is another aspect that disturbs the land. Trees are important as
they make the oxygen needed for any life and take in the carbon dioxide that
is breathed out. If trees are cut down unnecessarily then both the oxygen and
carbon dioxide content in the air are disturbed. Less oxygen in the air leads to
ozone depletion, hence affecting the ozone layer.

Effects of land pollution

Land pollution can be very dangerous to human life. Land pollution can be a
source of different diseases. Dirt can cause skin rushes, or any other different kinds
of diseases. Dump sites can cause bad smells in towns. When rubbish is continually
burnt it leads to air pollution which then affects human life. Deforestation reduces
the amount of trees which then affects the amount of rain. Lesser rains mean
lesser vegetation and food crops which then leads to hunger. Land pollution can
affect the climate.

Summary

* Poverty is mainly caused by drought or by lack of rainfall. When people are
poor they cannot afford the meals of the day because they don't have
money.

e When people don't have enough food they get sick easily.

* Many children have become orphans because of the HIV/AIDS pandemic

* Pollution is another challenge faced by the world today due to the
development of industries.

End of topic assessment test

Multiple choice questions

All are natural resources except .

A. soil B. minerals C. water D. road

The whole world is disturbed or worried by the following except
A. poverty B. pollution C. HIV/AIDS D. parties

Most working people earning below the poverty datum line are in
A. absolute poverty B. relative poverty

C. peasantry group D. joblessness group

HIV/AIDS is a challenge to the whole world because it

A. affects many people B. has no cure

C. makes people sick D. attacks black people

One of the causes of poverty include

A. low paid work B. agriculture _

C. good education D. consistent rainfall

The government helps those in absolute poverty by

A. giving parents work B. making parents work at school
C. providing BEAM inschools_ D. giving free books



--- Page 120 ---
If a person tests positive for HIV, then that person has AIDS.
A. Certainly B. Very true C. Not actually D. False
It is important for people to know their HIV status because it helps
A. one to know how to take care of oneself
B. people to go to prophets for healing
C. people to know who fo talk to
D. boys and girls know who their friends are
How has industrialisation destroyed the land?
A. Natural habitats have been destroyed.
B. Many trees have been planted.
C Good methods of farming are used.
D. Fertilisers produced have enriched the soil.
. One effect of poverty at home is .
A. unemployment B. pre- mature death
C. BEAM D. laziness

Structured questions

(a) What is air pollution?

(6b) What pollutes the air we breathe? Give three examples.

(c) How can you tell that the air is polluted?

(d) What part of the body is affected by breathing dirty air?
(e) What is the effect of breathing polluted air?

(a) Name any water borne disease you know.

(b) Drinking polluted water can cause diseases like j

(c) Why is clear water not necessarily clean and safe to drink?
(d) Why do we put lids on wells.
(e) What makes water in rivers not safe for human use?
(a) When noise irritates or hurts our ears it is pollution.
(b) What normally causes noise pollution?
(c) A is a good example of noise pollution.
(a) People with HIV/AIDS have the right to learn. [True/False]
(b) Why is it bad to throw away used baby pampers everywhere?
(c) Write one cause of poverty in communities.
(d) Is dropping out of school a cause or effect of poverty?
(a) How can we reduce land pollution:

(i) at school

(ii) at home

(iii) in the whole country?
(b) Write at least one way of reducing air pollution.



--- Page 121 ---
——

End of year assessment test

Multiple choice questions

One important role of the family is to

A. have members B. have children

C. protect its members D. be rich

Your father’s sister is your

A. niece B. aunt

C. cousin D. grandmother

One effect of migration is_

A. development of new cultures B. poor living conditions

C. drought D. too much rain

One cultural practice copied from whites by Africans is seen in ____

A. reading B. sleeping C. dressing D. copying
Indigenous Languages are languages __.

A. copied from others B. learnt at school

C. spoken by local people D. borrowed from somewhere
A ____is also a nuclear family.

A. polygamous family B. child headed family

C. one-parent family D. single parent family

What is courtship?

A. Preparation for marriage B. Marriage

C. When boys and girls are growing up_~—s—é@D:«.- Stages of development
Which one of the following is not a traditional way of getting married?

A. Kufizira B. White wedding
C. Musengabere D. Kukumbira
Identify the two different types of marriage.
A. Customary and marriage B. Civil and marriage
C. Civil and customary D. Marriage act
. The living together type of marriage in Ndebele is called ___
A. Ukuhlalisana B. Mapoto
C. Ukwenda D. Ukutshada
. Who built the Great Zimbabwe?
A. Shona B. San Cc. Bantu D. Mutapa
. The first ruler of the Mutapa state was ___.
A. Dombo B. Mutota
C. Gatsi Rusere D. Changamire

. Why did Mzilikazi make friends with traders?

A. For gold
B. He wanted guns and ammunitions

C. So as to let them in his area

D. He wanted tea.



--- Page 122 ---
. What attracted white people to Zimbabwe?
A. Mzilikazi B. Minerals
C. To expand D. Black people
. Allocating land to a young man is the responsibility of ___.
A. councillors B. district administrators
C. traditional leadership D. the Member of Parliament
. What was the convention on the rights of the child (CRC) to all countries?
A. Law B. Agreement of children's rights
C. Entitlements D. Infringement
. Which rights support children in a family?
A. Freedom B. Familyandcare C. Basic health D. Civil rights
. All Zimbabwean citizens have the right to__.
A. wash themselves B. aname and identity
C. grow up D. live in town
. Write one limitation of rights and responsibilities.
A. Be fair B. A written law
C. Right to life D. Human dignity

A girl went back to the classroom to look for her book, she found two boys in
the classroom. They moved towards her and started fondling her breast and
intimidating her, telling her not to say anything to anyone. After some minutes of
struggling, she got out of the classroom.
20. What abuse is this?

A. Pornography 8B. Verbal C. Physical D. Sexual
21. What should she do?

A. Run away. B. Keep it to herself.

C. Report the boys to the teacher. D. Tell all her friends.
22. A traditional practice that violates women's right is__.

A. virginity testing . abuse

C. gender . peace order
23. ___ is found near Masvingo.

A. Matendera B. Dlodlo Monuments

C. Great Zimbabwe D. Khami Monuments
24. Khami Monumenis are near __.

A. Masvingo B. Bulawayo

C. Buhera D. Rusape
25. Windows are important on a building because they allow __.

A. darkness ina room B. cleanliness in a room

C. aeration/ventilation in a room D. they do not break easily

. Languages spoken in Zimbabwe are up to__.
A. sixteen B. ten
C. two D. twelve



--- Page 123 ---
is the oldest heritage sight in the country.
A. Victorians B. Nyanga
C. Great Zimbabwe D. Khami ruins

. What role was played by Jairos Jiri in the lives of handicapped people?

A. He built some centres for them to do craft work.

B. He gave them food.

C. He punished them.

D. He taught them some skills like fishing and boat making.

. NGOs contribute a lot to OVCs in communities. NGO is an abbreviation

which stands for___.

A. New Goals for Schools

B. Non-Governmental Officials

C. Nothing Good for School Children
D. Non-Governmental Organisations

- Most of the elderly people are kept at old people's homes, one such place
is .
A. St Giles
B. Ingutsheni
C. Naran centre
D. Entembeni
. The main cash crops of Zimbabwe are grown inregion__.
A. land 4 B. land2 C. 5 only D. 4 only
2. Where is sugarcane grown?
A. in the Lowveld B. in the Highveld
C. in region 1 D. everywhere in the country
. Besides sugar what else do we get from sugarcane?
A. ethanol B. fuel C. sweet taste D. petrol
. Indigenous trees,
A. grow quickly B. take long to grow
C. are exported D. are useless trees
. Cross boarder traders belong tothe ___,
A. informal sector B. formal sector
C. vendors in streets D. business people
. A utility paid for in urban areas is ___.
A. soup B. budget C. maize D. electricity
. People have developed in communication from smoke signaling to__.
A. beating drums B. televisions
C. chanting D. horn blowing
. Transport developed from ____ fo space travel.
A. wheel B. sledge C. donkey D. bicycle
. Which mode of transport is best suitable for transporting cars from Japan to

Tanzania?
A. Rail B. Air C. Sea/water D. Road



--- Page 124 ---
. One danger of modern communication systems to learners is___.
A. they can communicate with dangerous people
B. they can research using the internet

C. they can communicate with their friends

D. they can sharpen their brains through paying games on computers
4], When people are poor it means they ___.

A. do not have enough B. have plenty
C. don't like a lot D. don't have cars
42. One cause of poverty is__.
A. working for the government B. joblessness
C. being educated D. foo much money
43. Boys and girls living in rural areas are safe from AIDS.
A. True B. Sometimes C. Often D. False
44, One material that pollutes water is.
A. food B. crops grown
C. chemicals from industries D. sugar
45. In___ areas, the roof should be attached firmly to the building so as to

prevent if from lifting.
A. flood prone
B. cyclone prone
C. earthquake prone
D. drought prone
46. The following project can create good employment except __.
A. poultry B. piggery
C. animal husbandry D. stealing
47, What important part did games play in people's lives in the past?
A. Games taught children discipline.
B. They taught children indiscipline.
C. They were meant for destroying people.
D. They were not good for their lives.
48. A day of rest for the Indigenous people is.

A. Sunday B. Saturday C. chisi/izilo D. Monday
49. A_____ is a mode of transport used to transport oil from Beira to Mutare.

A. bus B. aeroplane C. car D. pipeline
50. What is the end product of cotton?

A. Meat B. Cloth C. Food D. Flour

Structured Questions

]. (a) Father, mother and children living together make a . (1)

(b) Name two types of families. (2)
(c) Write one way of minimising migration. (1)
(d) Write two negative effects of conflict at school. (2)

(e) A foreign language that has become official in Zimbabwe is ,



--- Page 125 ---
(a) Give one traditional way of getting married.
(b) What is the difference between a civil anda customary marriage?
(c) What is courtship?

(d) Write one sign of puberty in a boy.

(a) What is tribute?

(b) Who was the leader of the Ndebele?

(Cc) The Rozvi state was led by people of the ___ totem.

(d) Name any one group of people who traded with the Muftapa.
(e) Who was the owner of BSAC?

(a) Write one responsibility of a pupil at school.

(6b) What happens to people who violet children's rights?

(c) Give one way through which one can be a citizen of a country.
(d) Write one right of a citizen.

(e) How can you tell if a child is being abused? State one way.

(a) Name the heritage site we find near Masvingo.

(b) Who are the inhabitants of an igloo?

(c) What materials are used to build an igloo?

(d) Why are huts-of pole and dagga common in most rural areas?

(a) Which two groups of people in a community need help?
(b) How did Jairos Jiri help the needy?
(c) What is the name of Jairos Jiri's first centre?

(a) What is the main cash crop of Zimbabwe?
(b) List the crops grown in region 5 of Zimbabwe.
(c) Give one indigenous tree used in carpentry?
(d) What is the planned use of money called?
(e) What are the two forms in which cash exists?

(a) Write two modes of transport you know.

(6b) How did people travel long ago?

(c) How is oil transported from Beira to Zimbabwe?

(d) What mode of transport is used to transport vegetables from
farmers to cities?

(e) State one advantage of the satellite.

—

(a) Write one problem of unemployment in Zimbabwe.
(6b) What name is given to rest day within the Ndebele communities?
(c) Write one importance of games in the past.

(d) State one example of a leisure activity.

(e) Why is it not good for young girls and boys to go to night clubs?

(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)



--- Page 126 ---
10. (a) State one cause of poverty in Zimbabwe.

(b) Suggest one way of reducing poverty in the country.

(c) What does HIV do to the body?

(d) Holy Family Primary School is near the road used by caterpillars
from Dorowa minerals, what pollution is likely to be experienced
at the school?

(e) What are the effects of drinking polluted water?



--- Page 127 ---
Other Grade 5 Learner’s books available

r

2A\ otnge press

| Ventures Primary

BA conn Pras
Ventures Primary
English

pm Doal“hklehan
Gare ReChis U

Whee Cree theeili sem

GBilccone ju prots PA|: Wogn pens

Ventures Primary Ventures Primary

Agriculture | | Family, Religion and
_ Moral Education

FA leon Y prean

Ventures Primary
alerye,

INAGNS



--- Page 128 ---
Ventures Primary
Heritage-Social
Studies Grade

Ventures Primary Heritage-Social Studies Grade 5 Learner's Book has been developed to support
the content, aims and objectives contained in. the New Primary Education Curriculum for
Zimbabwe. It contains all the activities that the learners need to cover the Heritage-Social Studies
Syllabus for Grade 5.

The book features:

Logical sequencing of topics and lessons.

Active learning and learner engagement strategies.

Wholesome development of the learner.

Colourful illustrations that reinforce and communicate content.

Accessible language.

Activities that balance individual and collaborative learning.

An inter-disciplinary approach to learning about heritage.

Examples drawn from everyday life.

A Zimbabwean perspective as well as an acknowledgement of globalisation.
A glossary with level-appropriate definitions.

Activities that encourage the learner to use modern ICTs in their everyday learning and at home.

eeeeern#e#e#eeeee e

completed with a comprehensive Facilitator's Resource Book.

~~ college press A

Approved by the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, 2018

The Learner's Book is part of the Junior Primary learner's Development Series AWM



