--- Page 1 ---
— — 2h

Science and Technology
Time

New Primary Course

_earner’s Book 3

James Chitamba and Donemore Gandazha
(Editors) ~

ZF IY Fintabwe Publishing House oi



--- Page 2 ---
= : -

~
re;
|
an |

:

® Zimbabwe Publishing House (Pvt) Ltd.
183 Acturus Road

P O Box GD510

Greendale

Harare

Zimbabwe

First Published by Zimpabw:: Publishing House 20] 7
New Curriculum Edition, 20. 7

Editors : Jomes Chitamba
CD onemore Gandazha

Editorial Assistant : ‘nes T. Mazenge
Design & Layout : \ let Kazingizi
Artists : \\ilSert Kakowa

horayl Dube

Cover Design : ' let Kazingizi
ISBN ! 778 1 77901 291 3
Printed by : IRT Printing Services

=—=o=>=>=—>—K_=_K__=z=£{_{&£_z—=~=—=—=£——{&x&x&x&{&{&{x{x{&$&E_ es
All tights reserved. No par’ of this publication may be reproduced. stored in a retrieval
system or transmittedin any ormorbyanymeans, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise wil? out the prior written permission of the publishers.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the ‘ollowing teachers for their invaluable contributions in this book:

Dafu Kome — Kushinga Pr) nary School, Millicent Dhiula — Cowdray Park Primary School.
Abigail Mupinga — Maser ane Primary School. Chafewa Verenizhu — Glenview 2 Primary

School. Perseverance Fanciso — Zengeza 4 Primary School. Engeline Mandisodza Moffat
Primary School, and Const-ince Chikwata — Highlands Junior School.

The publisher made every c!fort to acknowledge all those who participated in the developmen
of this book, but if anyone fas been inadvertently left out, please advise us at the first ‘
opportunity so that this can be addressed.



--- Page 3 ---
Unit Page

TOPIC 1; HEALTH AND SAFETY

1. Human body 1........ ssqqanocansdiseptas cececeucadeuvecdvvaeerstnescnverncesuneecs  nnnnehedsA:=0 100 CCL BUbeHeSpOREG #8 |

2. The NUMAN DOCY 2.... creer esersseeeceeectrreenerees ccccuustevunlusevunteesce seavegpvecesesequeeseparesenssneesarsees 12

3B. NUtHitlOmsesccsccssserenecees cnerseecectseseraasubeneraepnenseranes ferececeueparrens ede (gayjnaddssubsedio oxersssriene cevensecues 18

4,  DISQOSOS...cccccccscccsserseseeeecneeeneesenyenarereeneensy ssupetausuveseccenierdveseyos seranegonnaeventeqansesneasnes tpatnece . 24

5. SCPCRY cccsssseseseescessecesesssatevesansnancencadenenennavananenneaneueyanensereseensaees b sbabediddennissynapyabtes beneeeraneeneness 34

6. How much do you remember? cRgeaphtcevevoitesitsetianscsconpereyere: — rasveauests obey betta yaatarandecasnones 39
TOPIC 2: MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES

7. Characteristics of MatENAIS ,......... creer eee cbacusuueusuteedses  cabiwsvenequneeseneneeeseegenensadeneret A2

8. Elernents, Mixtures ANG COMPOUMNAS 2... reseeeeesuermeererrern ones seve p(sueicaasdsadacavidiianredesie 47

DJ. TOONS ceccccsreceeeccsersecenerescccessegperserceeecesteyprareUhetseuuareaaseeayeeneaeresepes) eepupenee! sagg oars soars sanpedyenbepeesen 51

10 Structures ......., ssubvivevrevavacaecarevavvevasessaesesecerqqensagectinecntsn#tyctebe © (daareevavbanecabaneanenegeersntaes wen BS
TOPIC 3: ENERGY AND FUELS

VV, EMO@IQY cssccssvessercsssesssessscessnsnsnsssoneesssesttarsssessanecssneansgnenscasanrenses: | oqtenunangentessaecuseaigngrenstinensnes 60

12, FUCLS ccccccosccsrecsecersecnseesccecgencecessverseeererseensesenesseeerseeeseensaniccuiberen,  gyeees bessycneeceenes peecennes jegeavenene 63

13. HOW MUCH GO YOU [EMEMDE!? .ccccseecncuiecerteserserrestristses cree eteesinneessbaseneseneneceeesegnen 67
TOPIC 4: ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS

14. Electricity ANd GIECTIONICS oe. ceveresteeeeees lasanavedacevengarvasengnocs » qoopwauesscceidesdigenanieiaesveapedatens 70

15. Electrical CONGUCTOFS AN INGUICTOMS .......6 6 cc cbc i cee ct ecapeeenecteneensenrererneeesentens 19
TOPIC 5: FORCES AND MAGNETS

16. FORCES GIN MAGMETS «0c eseesectereccerteneeeectenetenaeanseneascnnpscttecees  casauegeeesaarensens [oancsarsccoeacetnns 83
TOPIC 6: DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY

17. El@MeNnts Of GESIQN ....c.sescceccnenseeseenseastenstecertonnrreeeniersnreteee: casaesenteseatneneeeeteeasenenny averse 9]

18; HOW MUCH GO YOU FEMEMDEN? oo. csceecesvecteneteets tee cettcies | ceaeearneaseeceuessaeneensnenayyenonye® 95
TOPIC 7: WATER

19. Properties of wate? .......0+ cabbage avecakibun a roassisibeinedsiagstares foc sat pe anes eevaeeesnuaaereascepeaeeeneny 99

20. Sources Of WATEL 0... feeceeseeneens sowargapagquaovenscsorqprervecntavtiest)s sesiehtserssendiaecie «soth haven sdanesvenss 105

21, Water and environment

PPrrrrreerUrerEsrisre eric eral iess i ei et eee



--- Page 4 ---
a 118
23, Weather anid CluMate NOE OAS cacssesccseesessssuysnssesesstsvvees srpvatrasay soetteviseeeteeees codec 125
24, HOW MUCH GO YOU FEMEM IE? oo. csesssesssessersssesssserctesisnsens sussdbarcaet quvteesseseee sessesceecee 129
TOPIC 9: SOIL, PLANTS ANC ANIMALS
BB. SOM es sees ceescesen eeesonseas . auecsanetcessecussvecsesascstsvesas ep este-seueeeesseecevaseessseg eee reer 132
26, PIONS. cecccsecesecaceeesdrvea nen 141
27. ASUS once cccecccecgsuerseseees  cevssececsseves VAN DEAov ULES ARs ETT SeulaTaaN iy TLaveey edo) Coggeaterwmn pitaeessegereesaeesens 146
TOPIC 10: LANDFORMS AN > MAPS
28. LOMCHONMS occ cececoneee 155
TOPIC 11: SUSTAINABLE RF OURCE MANAGEMENT
29, Sustainable resource MAN IGEMENT ee. cococcccsecocceces, cieyeneenes cond an sansdynacas soe shaedvadanhas’ 1.60
BOL WOSTE cece cecy ee cauecenepensen (Kbie vse Dean dicoNirde oe bbvidavaseveoseeeessyendeseiligssae ate pervecdeonceseeessumes 166
ST. HOW MUCH dO YOU OMEN DAN? oo ccccdccseces soasetee. cesses serponcate cessentecetescestseseseaeesccees: 171
BZ. TOSE Vis osceccsessecusasessssecses  serceceseueerersesqerresecereuneeepeareceenepeeses pone Ub) paviteaKiceediewieavasasbaesaazes 173
SB. LOSE 2. cee siersnescsssenneaseese —sesueensenesvanuessssveasessrseninecassciees sisteyercul tessestgeeeeaeiesseesseuceses 175
SA. TOSY Boececssesccestecseteccstesess — decscssareevaragaessacensacececensuensssersensssenesaseses Wnenaaeasis eoesovvariweiedinesss 177
BB, T@St Ao. eve ccesetsetesesccesieens —seyyessecseauscavevareceavvavessasgvavas sasicsyscumsnaye _qnaseavuitersuseemeseeseeseese. 179
36. Tet Sc eacecees Weeveheasevdereds, — acdavadscsacesoucvagsser ster seopeateneaeenepg: peeaeascueras cessnssagsaseversuctaperseneeseone 181

TOPIC 8: WEATHER AND CLIMATE


--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
es Unit)

Human body |

introduction

Our body is made up of different parts. Each of tne parts does a different
job for the body to stay in good health and to work properly, It is our duty
to make sure that we take very good care of every part of the body. If
one part of or body Is not well, if affects all the other parts, and they in
turn will not wO¥K well. We also need to know t! ¢ right things we should
do and use daily when caring for our body paris.

A. The body parts

Which body part do you think is the biggest?
Tell us what it does?

Q ~~

~ >.
_ =>

Look at the boy. Label the following parts:

acd eye. ec, nose, mouth, neck, arm, hand, ! ger, leg, loot, toes. c

—
|


--- Page 7 ---
The diagram of the human body is showing us different body parts. Can
you name some of the body parts you see on the diagram? What work
does each body part do for the body? Think of how you came to school
today, What body parts helped you to cross the busy street or the stream
or river? Which body part did you use to eat your breakfast?

All our body parts are protected by the skin. The skin is our biggest body
part!

2a) Activity

Help each other to complete this table

Function/Work
seeing

Body part

Hearing

Holding, feeling, touching things
Eating 7

Walking, standinc. jumping

Eating food
Protecting everything inside the body

Wilh

What is our body made of?

Which body part is used for hearing?
We __ with our eyes,

Which is the most important body part?
We touch things with our __,

open >


--- Page 8 ---
(B. Caring for body parts

Our body parts need special care. Personal “ygiene is maintaining
cleanliness and grooming of the bady. it is a goxd step to health. Let us
look at the following:

The teeth

Look at Ano and Tino. They have white strong «ind healthy teeth. They
care for their teeth. They brush their teeth after very meal.



--- Page 9 ---
——_—eeoee err TT

Look at the pictures selow. What caused the teeth of these people to
decay? Discuss with your friend.

Your teeth are very irnportant because they cut food into small pieces
before it goes down into your stomach.

Brush your teeth at least twice a day especially after breakfast and after
supper before you gc to bed.

Brush your teeth using toothpaste to clean your mouth and teeth of
germs. Your toothbrush must be changed every three to four months\.

~~


--- Page 10 ---
- ssh your teeth using a toothbrush in small circulc: movements so that you
“oft hurt your gums. You should also brush the ‘+hewing teeth (molars).

--3k at Praise below. She is brushing her chew ng teeth . Praise uses aq

-oinbrush, toothpaste and water to brush he leeth. She brushes her
“22Tn at the sink.

“=” Brushing teeth, you should also brush the rongue. Look at Praise,
“= S$ Orushing her tongue with a toothbrush to « eep it clean.



--- Page 11 ---
Eat less sweet foods like sweets, soft drinks, biscuits and cakes. Sweet
foods bring germs to your teeth and these cause tooth decay,

Never open a soft drin« bottle using your teeth. Your tooth might crack
and allow germs to enrer if.

Visit a dentist regularly for check-ups, at least twice a year.

The eyes

* At night, do not read in poor light. Your room must be well lit.
* During the day, dc not read with the direct sunlight on your book,

* Wash your eyes with soap and a soft towel carefully every day when
you bath.

* Youmust have plerty of sleep daily and do not rub your eyes for too
long,

* Do not look at a computer or phone screen for too long.
* Eat foods like oranges and carrots to improve your eyesight.
¢- Protect your eyes from smoke.

* Always wear sunglasses or a hat to protect your eyes from the sun
when outdoors,

The hands

We touch many things with our hands and so germs get to our hands.

We must wash them with clean water and soap before handling or
eating food. |



--- Page 12 ---
* Wemust wash our hands after visiting the to lst,
* Our fingernails must be short and always clecn,

The hair

* Your hair must be washed well everyday bit if treated or plaited, it
must be washed once every week.

* If possible hair should be kept short.

* Washing and combing your hair daily stops g =tms and lice from hiding
In it,

* Try not to share your comb as this might sprad diseases.

The ear

Do not play or work in a place ‘with too much noise. Too
much noise can damage your hearing.

You must not put anything in your ear, for example, ear
phones with high volume or st arp objects and match
sticks. This can damage your eardrum,

Use a soft towel or earbuds to « lean your ear.

init


--- Page 13 ---
Choose the correct answer.

1. Which of the following is not a body part?
A. arms B. neck Cc. food D, mouth

2. We smell things using our
A. hands B. nose

Cc. mouth D, eyes

3. Which of the following foods is bad for our teeth?
A. porridge B. meat C. sweet biscuits D. milk

4. Sharing a comb might spread ,

A. bilharzia B. malaria C. headache OD. diseases

5. We must wash our

with soap after visiting the toilet.

A. ears B. mouth Cc. hands D. body

(C. Daily body washing)



--- Page 14 ---
Which activities can make us sweat? Which body parts sweat more than
others?

Everyday we do activities that make us sweat, These may include cooking
on the fire, jumping, digging, cleaning the floc or running around the
school grounds. The sun’s heat can also make us sweat. Some of our
body parts sweat more than others. If we do no: wash these body parts
thoroughly everyday, they become dirty and sme!l badly. The unwashed,
sweaty body parts attract germs to our bodies. R “member to wash these
body parts everyday when you bath so that you remove the sweat. If
we forget or do not bath properly, our bodies wil oegin to smell, Nobody
wants to be close to someone who is smelling.

Activity

Look at the picture of the boy bathiiig on Page 8 and write
the part of the body that the boy roust remember to bath
thoroughly with soap to remove the : weat.

Which activity can make us sweat?

Why should we bath everyday?

Unwashed body parts attract _

Weuse sto remove sweat when bathin J.

If we do not bath properly our bodies will be ginto

D. Toiletries

Which things do you use everyday to care for your body? Why do you
need these?

oO RPWD >

When bathing and taking care of our bodies ve use things like soap,
towel, toothbrush, toothpaste, comb. hairbrus . Shampoo and many
others.

These are called toiletries, You have probably watehed your father using
shaving cream. It is another example of a toilet’y,

Look at the pictures on the next page. They show examples of toiletries,
Have you used any of these at your home? Have: you seen any of them?
Discuss with your friend the uses of these toiletrics.

~“


--- Page 15 ---
a

‘h ~ |
[_Hairbrush Toothbrush

Shes | Activity
4) aa List all the items that you can think of that we use daily to take
iL) care of our bodies.

f
Soe @ @ @
-
© © @
-~

—
.

What are toilet ies?
Give two exar’ ples of toiletries?
What happens if we do not wash our body properly?

Name one bocy part we should always rernember to wash?

What does dirty attract to our body?

2.
3.
A.
5.

Collect pictures of all toiletries we use everyday at home.
Make a picture frame for display In your class. Collect empty
contain=rs of toiletries like toothpaste, soap, shampoo and
arrange these neatly in a corner in your classroom.

/

Se


--- Page 16 ---
“ = » Search eight words that are about our body parts and
> a f faking care of them. Toothbrush as been done for you,
|.
FoF.S QO AP CoM R K D 2 4
1.9 OT FB RUS HA B :
OO A E AA M Ciwa sg H &
YT PE I T DE E Ac fF 6 7
EDA TR HAMA DAS |
LE TH WCNWTce R} 8 Buy
0 bo

Bristles > the most important part of the toot brush used for brushing

teeth.
Eardrum =: thin skin in your ear which catches sound for you to hear.
External >: on the outside.
Protect : to keep away from danger or hairn.
Sweat : watery liquid that comes out of our Skin.

Toothpaste : a substance used to clean your fisth,



--- Page 17 ---
Ut.

The human body 2

Introduction

After washing and cleaning our bodies we also need to look beautiful
and handsome before our friends and all the people we meet every day.
You may have watched your parents preparing to go out for work or for
a journey or to just meet friends. After bathing they use other items which
may change ‘he way they look, As we get used to what we want to look
like every day. we also learn to make our own things to help us to care
for our bodies and to learn how to handle and use the things properly.

(A. Cosmetics

Can you remember the things that our parents use to look different and
beautiful? Name them.

You may have heard your mother or elder sister at home saying, “| have
not yet finished my make-up.” What they mean is that they have not yet
finished using cosmetics to rnake them look different and beautiful.

The diagram is showing us how the lady looks before and after she has
used cosmetics. She has used lipstick, eye liner, eye shadow, hair colour



--- Page 18 ---
and nail polisn. Can yOu now see that she looks different from the first
diagram? She has used cosmetics to change ths way she looks. All the
subsiances that we use to make us look beautiful cnd attractive are calieq
cosmetics. Remember cosmetics do not change our body structure nor
the way our body parts work. Cosmetics only ch ange our appearance.

some cosmetics do not change how we look. ut they make us sme:
good. Can you guess what these are? Yes, ff ese are cosmetics like
perfumes, lotions, deodorants and some cream: applied to the skin,

Unlike toiletries, cosmetics are usually used by olde deople. Youmay need
to become an adult for you fo get permission fram your parents to use
cosmetics such as lipstick, finger nail and toe nail Follsh, eye liner, eyebrow
Pencils, perfumes, face powders, hair colours, | air sprays, deodorants,
Mascara, Moisturisers like lotions and some bod\ creams.

ltocsh’ —. Activity
| Name a cosmetic and describe how © is used on the body.

. Z

___ Make us change our appearance,

Cosmetics thai make us smell goodarecdlled
Where is lipstick applied?

Cosmetics are usually used bys people.

After bathing we apply _ son the body.

B. Making body cleaning equipment

What body cleaning equipment do you use eve iyday? Which of these
can you design and make?

oR wn >

8ody cleaning equinment is very important for ‘he proper care of our
different body parts. "hey are as important as toile vies and cosmetics that
ore used daily. Not all of us are lucky to have bouy cleaning equipment
our homes. This does not mean that we should not take care of our
body parts. We should learn to design and make >urown body cleaning
equipment. If you live in the rural areas, there ar= many things you can
4se as body cleaning equipment. Twigs from !ushangura, Mushenje


--- Page 19 ---
and Mushuma trees can be designed to serve as a toothbrush. Clean
ash can be used to clean teeth. A moderately rough stone in rural and
urban areas can be used for removing cracks under the feet. There is also
a runner plant called loofah whose fruit parf when dried can be made
into a sponge which is very good for scrubbing the body when bathing.

& ~g BS

A 2 ah

fy rn Oo ’ >
Ste! ACtivity

| Discuss cid describe the body cleaning equipment you have
Ue. made.

Fill in the questions below using the given words.

1. What can be used in place of toothpaste?

2. We ___ the bociy when bathing.

3. A can be used to remove cracks on the feet.
4 usually use cosmetics.

5. A. is a bovly cleaning equipment from a plant .

sponge, stor t ar ash, «

Which cleaning eauipment models were easy to make? Which ones
were difficult to moke?

When we design and make cleaning equipment, we need to know the
exact body part the equipment is going te clean. This will help us to know
how we are going 'o design the equipment and the material needed
for the equipment, We also have to know whether we are going to use

material which Is hard, smooth, soft or rough which is suitable for the
body part,

[14 J


--- Page 20 ---
od ed —— et

Now, we want to see if you know the cornect equipment needed for
cleaning various body parts.

ea, Activity

In your groups, match the cleaning « quipment shown below
to the body part itis used to clean. Use arrows to match them.
Matching a comb to hair has been ¢one for you.

Feet

Hair

What cleaning equipment can be made a’ nome?
What do we need to design cleaning equipment?
Which cleaning equipment should be smocath?
Which cleaning equipment should be roug”?
Wecanuse _—s fo. clean our ears.

GVPoen>


--- Page 21 ---
{ D. Manipulating cleaning substances and equipment }

It is important for us to be able to know the right toiletries, cosmetics
and body cleaning equipment. We should be able to use the cleaning
substances and equipment in the correct way. We should also be able to
follow correctly the aitections given on the containers of the substances
on how to use the toiletries, cosmetics and equipment.

.e Activity
aed Take turns to handle sample toiletries, cosmetics and other
2 cleanine equipment, Show how each substance and

i“ equipment is used to take care of the body.

Li
#.
“Oe @€ © ®
“ee @ «©

os

Choose the correct answer

1. Wecanuse __—i to clean our teeth,

A. sponge B. stones Cc. comp D. ashes
2. Which of the foil owing is the odd one out?

A. stone B. twigs C. ashes D. toothbrush
3. Which isa body oart cleaning equipment?

A. sponge B. perfume C. lotion D. deodorant
4, A stane can remove cracks on the feet,

A. smooth B. soft C. rough D. hard
5. We should follov given on the containers of cosmetics.

A. ways B. directions CC. writings D. drawings

ana Make a picture frame of all cosmetics we use at home. Display
yo = ™ the mode: cleaning equipment you have designed and made.
NS Label these.



--- Page 22 ---
GAME
” » Write as many words as you ccin from the word target

» os < given, There is a nine letter wor? that is about what we
owes gy © «Have learnt. Try to form this wor =.
|_¢ s | |
E T @)
[mM [clos
Glossary

Appearance : the way something looks like.

Attractive : something nice or pleasing.

Cosmetics : cream, lotion, powder and ot! ier ifems put on the face
of body to improve appeararce or look better.

Equipment : things needed for you to do something.

Moderately : not too much and not too littl>.

Substances : things used to do something.



--- Page 23 ---
ail

ees (Unit 3 |

Nutrition

it ig not enough for .'s to simply care for our bodies, We all need food fo
be able to survive. | 27ng ago, people nunted animals for food. They also
gathered fruits in the forests. As time went on, people began to glow
most of theit food. Today most of our food is supplied to shops by farmers
where we go and buy it.

( A. Sources of food and their groups )

What is food? Whe'e does most of our food come from?

Food is anything we eat or drink for us to grow and stay healthy. Most of
our food comes fromm two main sources which are plants and animals.
Most of our food, however, comes from plants. The food we eat everyday
is our staple food.

Food from pianis

Most of the food comes from the seeds of plants like maize, wheat and
rice, Legumes like Deans, peas, cowpeas, groundnuts and roundnuts
also give us food. Pants like monkey oranges (matamba), snot apples
(matohwe), oranges. apples, tsubvu, mazhanje and others give us fruits.
From plants we get food like potatoes, tomatoes, carrots, spinach, lettuce,
pumpkin leaves (Mm. boora), tsunga and many other vegetables.

Tsubvu/Umitshongela

oo



--- Page 24 ---
Food from animals

“Ve also get food from animals. Examples of fooc rom animals are meat,
milk, cheese, eggs, honey, poultry meat, yoghu |, fish and many others.

8) Activity

a
an
2
oh
F
s

ad

Ba rtd gl

Write at least five foods we get from >lants.
Make a list of wild fruits and fruits tha! are grown by people.

eee


--- Page 25 ---
t
Hee? - aD
e ¢€© 6
on

1. Food is anything we ____ or drink.

A. plant B. eat C. buys D. sells
2. Wegetmilk fromthe _.

A. boifle B. pig Cc. cow D. hen
3. Wegeteggsirom

A. hen B. plants Cc. cow D. goat
4. Longago people ___ animals for food and gathered fruits in the

forest.

A. hunted B. cooked Cc. tamed D. kept
5. Which food co we get from an orchard?

A. apple B. maize Cc. potatoes D. rice

(iB. Food is important to our body })

Food is important 19 our bodies because it makes us grow, gives us energy
and protects us from diseases.

Billy (telling Petty)

Look at me MY
¢iand. Can YOu

see now big ANC
strona , am. \ eal
beans, &G9s-
cove. peanuts
ond $ dza,

That is good of
you my friend and
look at me!am siim
because ! Carry junk
food in my luncn

box. My mother

packs jiggies, freezit
and sweets for
my junch
evervdgy.

Petty (responding)



--- Page 26 ---
Energy-giving food

Energy giving foods give us energy to work anc play, We get energy
giving food from plants such as maize, wheat, poiatoes and yams. Below
are pictures of eneray giving foods:

| Potatoes] Mealle-mecl | Bread

| Rice Dina J
|
3 |

i “Y |

|

Protective food

Protective food proiects us from diseases. We 3et the food from fruits
and vegetables, Apples, monkey oranges (ma amba), cabbage and
Tomatoes are protective foods. Below are pictulss of protective foods.

Body-building food

sody building food makes us grow cand keeps u warm. Butter, peanuts,
Mulk and meat are body building foods. Below a’a pictures of foods that

™ake us grow.

eee


--- Page 27 ---
| Activit

Using the pictures above discuss and list down the energy-

}) giving, protective and body-building foods grown in
your aren.

Give one activity that we do every day.

Name any two examples of energy-giving foods.
Which nutrient gives us energy?

Why should we eat fruits and vegetables?

Why do children need food rich in proteins?

Fe Pe N =



--- Page 28 ---
Find out the types of food commonly found in towns and rural
areas that give us all the nutrients ther Our bodies need.

GAME
ee = >
Pa gi Ploy a game of the sources of 20d and food groups
. a ai rs
———
lam a plant

| give you a lot of proteins
Some call me a legume
Who am |?

lam an animal

| live in a kraal

| eat grass

| give you proteins
Who am 1?

1am your staple crop
lam a plant
Who am |?

Glossary

Food : anything we eat or drink.
Energy : Power to do work.

Nutrition : the process whereby the body use:s food for growth.
Orchard =: a garden of fruits.

~~

-



--- Page 29 ---
F

Ee

Diseases

introduction

Most of us have been ill at some point. We may have wondered what
made us ill, Mayte we ate food which had gone bad, or may have
drunk some wate! which was dirty. But what thing was in the bad food
and ditty water which made us ill or sick? Knowing what makes us ill is
very important because it helps to prevent the illness.

What are germs? ‘"an we see them with our own eyes? What harmcan
they do to us?

More than half of ilinesses and deaths are caused by small organisms
called germs. Germs are so small that we cannot see them with our own
eyes. We need the help of a powerful machine called a microscope

to see them. A microscope makes germs look bigger. We say they are
magnified.

,

|___Amicroscope —_—— [Germs magnified by micro

sccope
There are many diferent germs. These are bacteria, viruses, fungi and

protozoa. They alse cause different diseases. When they get in our body
they multiply and increase.

When viruses enter our bodies they reproduce cand increase. This makes

Us Ill and we may cic if we do not get treated, Flue, polio and measles
are caused by viruses.


--- Page 30 ---
uv

Bacteria make-poison which gets into our blowd and this makes us ill.
Tuberculosis, tetanus, typhoid and wh..0ping cough are caused by
bacteria.

Fungi cause diseases like ringworm which affec’s skin.

You may have seen some small organisms swimming in water and thought
“Ah, these are germs! | have seen germs!” and « alled out to your friends
to come and see germs.

These are not germs. They are just small creatu.es in water. Remember
inat you can never see germs with your eyes. Y su needa microscope.

| List all diseases that you think are caused by germs,

Per e%e°
“Ff @€6ee

1. Diseases are caused by

2 Wecannot see with our own eyes.

3. Amachine used to see germs is called a
4 is a disease Caused by bacteria.

$ is GO disease Caused by viruses.


--- Page 31 ---
i B. Prevention of disease)

Where do germs live? How do they enter our body? How can we stop
germs from moking us III?

For us to be able to prevent diseases caused by germs we need to know
where germs live and how we may kill them, we also need to know how
they enter our bodies to make us ill.

Germs can enter our bodies through the nose, eyes, mouth or through a
cut or bite on our skin and through our reproductive organs,

You may be asking yourself now, where do these germs come from and
how do they get into my body?

The housefly

People think ft is the most dangerous insect in the world,

If can spread about thirty diseases to people which include typhoid,
diphtheria ane diarrhoea. Flies and gems like dirty places and waste.

lf waste and rubbish are not covered or burnt or we do not clean the
toilet, flies land on the ditty and waste,

The houseflies then come and land on our uncovered food passing on

germs they caried on their bodies to our food. When we eat the food
we become ill.

Water

Water from open wells, dams and rivers, though looking clean, may
have germs. If ve drink water from these sources we may get typhoid

or cholera.
“Ea


--- Page 32 ---
op

IW
OW

1a

nd

1e

mn
2d

—————E———

Touching

We touch a lot of things with our hands everyauy. Germs get onto our
hands. If we then handle things like food, plate: or clothes, germs from
our hands pass on to them. If someone later eats the food or handles the
olates, the germs pass on to these people and ney become sick.



--- Page 33 ---
[=

We must always wash our hands before we touch and eat food to prevent
the spread of he germs. Hands should also be washed after using the
toilet so that w> do not spread germs from the toilets.

Coughing

When we cougii, germs come out of our mouth. The germs move through
the air and they can get to another person near us. Many diseases are
passed to pecnile in this way.

When coughing, we must cover our mouth with a handkerchief. If you

want to cough. nove away from other people so that you do not spread
germs to them

~


--- Page 34 ---
- “7

ant In and on food

16 ~
Germs can live on fruits and vegetables. They also like milk and love to be
On babies milk bottles. These germs give people siarrhoea and stomach

ache.
gh Make sure you wash fruits and vegetables before you eat them, Washing
1e ramoves germs on fruits and vegetables.

insect bites

Mosquitoes, ticks and fleas have germs in their bodies. When they bite us
they put germs into our blood, and this makes us sick. Diseases like malaria
and rabies are passed from one person to ano from one person fo anot ef this ae

aN 2... =

: Mosquito] Tick =~] Flea |

I Preventing diseases
’ “ow can we protect ourselves from diseases cc used by germs?
| * Wemust wash our hands with soap and clean water before we handle
food and after visiting the toilet.
| * Wemust burn all the rubbish in our environ ent and cover all waste
dumps.
- Fresh fruits must be washed thoroughly with -!ean water before they
are eaten.
i * Cover your mouth when coughing and cou jh away from food and
. other people nearby.
* Containers with drinking water must have lics. and must be covered.
* in towns and cities refuse and rubbish in birs must be carried away
fram homes.
«= rural areas rubbish is thrown in rubbish pits and buried.
u * Sewage pipes must be repaired.
d - 8Sulld the cattle kraal some distance from the house.


--- Page 35 ---
SSeS

* Wear shoes, sandals to stop germs from the ground to enter your body.
* We must fetch our water from protected sources like a Covered well,
borehole or ‘ioma tap. Boil water from unprotected Sources of water.

* Wemust no> wash Our Clothes or bath in the river,

* Protect yourself from mosquito bites by sleeping under a mosquito
net, using a rnosquito repellent or wearing long clothes during the

evening.
* We must wos our bodies daily.
* We must brush our teeth at least twice a day or after every meal,
* Use the toilets Properly and clean them well.
* Keep the kitcnen clean and all food must be covered,

Activity

Move around your school and find out places where germs
can live. Germs can live in rubbish pits, toilets and other places.
Think of other Places in your home and then your community

where germs can live. List these dewn and say how we can
preverf germs coming from these Places to people.

Wemust__ our hands after visiting the toilet.

Why should fruits be washed with clean water before they are eaten?
Name one Protected source of water.

Which animal passes rabies?

When must we brush Our teeth?

We can protect ourselves from mosquito bites by

SOB wn =

C. Diarrhoea: causes and prevention

What is diarrhoea? What causes diarrhoea? How do | know | have
diarrhoea? How ccin| Prevent diarrhoea?

A person has diarr- 9€a when he or she Passes out loose watery stools in
short spaces of time. You may have more frequent loose stools three or
four times a day and you feel like running to the toilet tight away without
delay. You may have some Pain in your stomach, You may vomit and
have a fever, Sometimes you May pass out loose watery stools with blood



--- Page 36 ---
Wy. or with some mucus. You rnay not like to eat fooc:i and may lose weight
all, and a lot of water from your body.

ots Youmay get diarrhoea by eating contaminated ood or food with germs

or drinking water with germs. You may also get diarrhoea by coming into
ifo close contact with a person suffering from the cd sease.
ne

Preventing diarrhoea

* Boil drinking water from unprotected water sources.

+ You must have hygienic food preparation aid storage.

* Wash hands with clean water and soap and ‘nse well under running
water when preparing food and after visiting, the toilet.

* Drinking water must be clean and should come from protected
sources like wells, boreholes and taps.

ns * People must use the toilet instead of the busn. Flies will bring germs
#8. to food and people.
V : ff there is someone suffering from diarrhoec in the family, the toilet

must be treated with a disinfectant.
* Openings of pit latrine or blair toilets must be covered when not in use.

Oral rehydration solution

This is a drink which should be given to a person s .ffering from diarhoea.
> helps the person to recover some water lost tf orn the body because

4 of diarrhoea.
The drink is made by mixing 6 level teaspoons of sugar and half level
‘saspoon of salt, dissolved in 1 litre boiled clear water.

2

n

ue

it Oral rehydration solution

B|

4 Make the patient drink as much of the solution as possible.

aes


--- Page 37 ---
&
; e @ ©
€* Co So eee
o™

1. Which of the following insects is the most dangerous to people?

A. bee B. grasshopper C. cockroach D. housefly
2. Youmay gettyphoidor__if you drink water with germs.
A. cholera B. malaria C. bilharzia D. polio
3. What disease is caused by a mosquito?
A. polio B. bilharzia C. cholera D. malaria
4. Before hanciling food we must
A. visit the toilet B. put the food in a refrigerator
C. wash our hands D. use a knife

5. The Oral Renydration Solution Is used to treat a person suffering from

A. bilharzic B. polio C. diarrhoea D. malaria

Gaither the required items and Prepare the oral rehydration

_-~, soluton in your groups. Taste the solution and describe how it
_ tastes.



--- Page 38 ---
GAME Word search

i
“ 2?  Fromileft to right or top to bottom search for seven words
a> me 5 about health that we have lear +t this week. Diarrhoea
= has been done for you.

Find
1. Diarrhoea
2. Gens
3. Cholera
4, Diseases
5. Wafer
6. Housefly
7. Prevent
| |
| |
Contaminate : to pollute or make dirty.
. Disease :  iliness or sickness (ill health),
4 Disinfectant : chemical used for cleaning.
it
Environment : our area, where we live.
i Magnify : enlarge or make bigger.
Mucus : a thick liquid produced inside !ne nose.
Prevent : tostop something from happening,

Stool : human waste.



--- Page 39 ---
ee Ut
Safety

Introduction

In the laboratory scientists experiment to test their ideas. At our school we
may also have a aboratory where we do experiments to test ideas we
have learnt in science. In a laboratory we should work calmly, carefully
and without distursing each other by making noise and running around,
If we do this, accidents may happen which can hurt people.

A. Accidents in the laboratory

What do you think are some of the accidents that can happen ina
laboratory?

lf we are not carsful in a science laboratory, many accidents may
happen. These accidents may include the following:

* Substances in ihe laboratory catching fire.

* Dangerous chemicals spilling onto your skins,

* Being burnt or scalded by heat from the Instruments.

* Having chemicals spilling into your eyes.

* Being cut by sharp objects,

* slipping and falliig because of slippery chemicals on the floor,
* Being bitten by animals like rats during an experiment.

* Objects on tales falling after being hooked by loose clothing
someone is wearing.


--- Page 40 ---
Activity

Using the diagram of pupils in the school science laboratory.
write down the accidents that have happened and those
which can happen.

ay

1. Where do scientists test their ideas?

2. Which animal can bite a person in a laboratory?
3. Slippery chemicals on the floor can make us
4 Why should we not run around in a laborato vy?

$ Weshouldnot _ each other by making / cise.

_ Objects and substances that cause accidents in the
laborato

Wrich objects and substances can cause acci:ients in a laboratory?

* Cuts can be caused by broken glass from cvjects like test tubes or
tubes made of glass.

-* Razor blades can also cause cuts.



--- Page 41 ---
SOR wD =

Chemicals ike acid can Spill on your skin. It can damage or harm
your skin, especially your face and eyes which might not be covered.

Liquids like ethanol catch fire easily. They can cause fire if there is a
flame nearty,

If a. gas leaks from a gas tank, it can cquse a fire.

Hot objects like glass, metal rods, metal spoons and hot liquids can
Burn or scald your hands.

Activity

List cry activities that we should co in a laboratory to prevent

accicents. Watch a video with your teacher showing accidents
In the lab.

What can couse falling in the laboratory?

Why should we cover our eyes in the laboratory?

Which chemical can damage your skin in the laboratory?
What can couse a fire in the laboratory?

Name a hot object in the laboratory that can burn your hands.
What can couse cuts in a laboratory?

C. Safety rules inthe laboratory )

Which rules do you think are important in a school science laboratory?

The following safety rules can Prevent accidents in a school science
laboratory,

Do not taste any substance in the laboratory

Do not eat or oring any food in the laboratory,

Chemicals ana glass objects should be handled with care,
Do not handle hot objects with your hands

Broken glass siiould be carefully swept away,


--- Page 42 ---
_ > notrun around the laboratory.
.2ar clothes to protect you when handling chemicals.
_2arsafety goggles to protect your eyes when handling chemicals.
235 taps not being used must be closed.
-"‘er use, sharp objects like razor blades and \eedles must be locked!
2 WwOy.
* “ash your hands after handling chemicals.
= >o not move around tne laboratory with op=n fire.
* “ioe all liquids spilled on the floor.
*  _sten to the teacher's instructions all the tim =.
* Do not enter into the laboratory when the te acher is not around,

Activity

Identify accidents which might be catised by children running
around the school science laborator:

C.-°.°. °.

1% Wemustnot —__ any substance in the lat) oratory.
A. take B. carry Cc. taste D. give
2 What must you wear fo protect your eyes?
A. goggles B. clothes C. jersey D. warmclothes

~ 3% Who should give instructions in a school labevatory?
A. ourparents B. ourteacher C. ourfricids OD. visitors
& Weshould wash ourhandsafterhandling
A. food B. goggles Cc. chemi-als Dz. tins
S Why must we not run around the laboratory °
A. because we have all the time
B. because we can cause noise
C. because it causes hunger
D. because we can cause an accident an i injury

Find out from your parents and teach =1s the tests that can be
done in the laboratory and how they nelp people.



--- Page 43 ---
o Vord formation

ya. ras! Make a nine letter word about things you should never
aaa) taste in a laboratory.

True/false

1. There are food stuffs in the laboratory,

2. Glass materials are found in the
laboratory.

3. You must not talk in the laboratory,
4, Thereisa thermometer in the laboratory.

Glossary

Chaos : disorder,

Chemicals * substances used in the laboratory.

Experiment * Oprocess done to discover or find out something.
Equipment > tools used,

Gas > @ substance like air.
Laboratory * Groom where experiments are carried,

Safety goggles ‘ glasses worn to protect eyes,

Scalded - fo be burnt by a hot liquid or chemical.


--- Page 44 ---
Unit

This section covers what you did in the past five weeks.

Paper |

Read the questions carefully and choose the correct answer.

1.

Which body part do we use to feel and touc things?

A. the feet B. the eyes Cc. the hand D. the nose
Which body part is the most important?

A. the nose B. Allofthem C. the eyes D. the teeth
We must brush our teeth 30 minutes after ev=ry

A meal B. bath C. sports iay D. break time
We brush our teeth using the toothbrush anc!

A. asponge ' B. soap C. toiletry D. toothpaste
When must you change your toothbrush?

A. after one week B. after i ree - four months

C. after six months D. after one year

Which food may cause our teeth to decay”

A. fresh fruits B. milk

Cc. sweets D. green vegetables

Wash your hands with clean waterand and rinse under running
water,

A. soap B. acid Cc. chem cal D. gas

Which one is an example of a toiletry?

A. water B. perfume C. toothiorush OD. lipstick

What do cosmetics do to a person?
A. they grow up

B. they smile a lot

Cc. they change her appearance
D. they become too old


--- Page 45 ---
10. Which are the two main sources of food?

C. legumes and plants D. plants and animals
11. Which food gives us energy?

12. Green vegetables and fruits give us a nutrient called

14. Why shoud you sleep under a mosquito net?

A. to feel warm B. to prevent malaria
C. tostop the cold D. to stop noise
15. Scientists co their experiments in a

Paper 2

Answer all questions.

16. a) Name any two foods that give us proteins.
b) Give two examples of cosmetics.
c) Which nsect is the most dangerous fo people?

. Q)
What causes diarrhoea?

What co we use to see germs?

Why do we wash our hands after visiting the toilet?

A. plants and fruits B. animals and vegetables

; A. vegeiables B. sadza C. beans D. carrots

A. carbohydrates B. vitamins
C. proteins D. fats
13. The food we eat almost every day is our diet.
A. good B. only C. staple D. other

A. labora'ory B. classroom CC. home D. school

Give one accident that might happen in a laboratory.

(2)
(2)
(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)


--- Page 46 ---
f

PS :



--- Page 47 ---
Unit 7

| | Characteristics of materials

Introduction

There are different ‘things we use at home and at school. The things are
made of different materials. Some of these things can be made by people
but others are found at different places, Trees, stones and grass are not
made by people. A door, a dish or a window is made by a person. Things
we make need to he drawn before they are made.

A. Natural materials

Look around you, [sll the class what you can see. Which things do you
see every day? Things which have not been created by man are natural
materials. They were created by God.

The tree has different parts. Name the parts. What colour is the grass near
the tree? Name one use of the grass. Why is the grass looking green?

~~


--- Page 48 ---
iors have different shapes. Some stones are used for building houses
ac bridges. What else is used for building a house?

| ~ | Discuss why stones are used for building a bridge?

B. Man-made materials

Look around your classroom. Tell the class wha you can see. Which
things were not made by God? Things which have been made by man
are called man-made materials.



--- Page 49 ---
Mother washes clothes in a dish. The dish is made of plastic. Grandmother ~
likes a metal dish. What is your dish made of? Which dish is stronger, a !
plastic or a metal disi?

Father ls combing his nair. What is he using? What is the comb made of?

Themba lives in a big house with his mother and father. The house has |
many windows and coors. It was built using different materials. Name four

things it is made of? What are huts found in rural areas made of? Why is
the door painted?


--- Page 50 ---
_o0k at the picture. Mother is cooking using a Wooden spoon. Can you
“nd out why we use wooden materials for cool.ing? Yes we use wood
tor cooking because it does not conduct hect.

Activity

Collect different items and materials fr 2m your environment,
Sort them according to what they are: made of.

SY %e © ©& ‘Exercise...
mm |
220d these words and write ther under the given groups as in the

*obie below:

Sorhs stone, leah, door, pOpel Sha, Gtrs. soll Wile! WO
Man-made materials _|Natural materials ee
oottle 7 stone |

ee oe
| —
—

a



--- Page 51 ---
2, Name any two materials made of plastic.
3. Name any two materials made from wood.

GAME Worl search

| ® From left to right or top to bottom, search for seven words
Pie Fy about materials that we have learnt this week. Wood
So has been done for you.

Conductor * Gmaterial which allows electricity or heat to pass
Through.
Environment * the land, the water, the gir and the buildings
ciound us and the conditions in which we live, in
Material > scmMething that can be used for making anything. t
4



--- Page 52 ---
introduction

When we place or add two more things togetl er we will be making a
mixture. However mixtures can be separated w! ile compounds cannot
be separated. When you mix mealie-meal with | ce it can be separated
or mix water and dirt it can also be separatec. Now let us give more
examples of mixtures and compounds.

“!: Hove Is milking a cow. Tino is drinking milk fom The cow, The milk is
sesh and warm. Think of other things that are pure and tell your teacher.


--- Page 53 ---
your friend about impure things found at home. How can YOU separate
Soil from sugar?

Oy-* 6".
. Milkisa _ Material. (oure / impure)

From the picture. what is likely to make the milk impure?
How can sugar bs separated from soil?

Between sugar and soil, what dissolves in water?

Why does the lid of the pot have q pipe?

.8.__ Purifying water

The teacher asked Kh imbu and Kujani to make dirty water clear, Khumbu
used an empty Cooking oil container and Kujani used a pot,

9 RwOn =



--- Page 54 ---
Activity

Do the following experiment in group;

Experiment

Purifying water by filtration

Apparatus: glass, water, soil, funnel, fiter paper, grass,
small stones and sand.

* Put water in a glass.

: Make it dirty by adding soil and grass.

» Place some small stones and sand into the funnel.

* Pour the dirty water into the funnel.

- Let it drip slowly.

* Observe if the water still has the soil and grass.

:
He © @ ©
e @ ¢
ow

Name two things that can make water dirty
What can be separated from water by fiitrarion?
Why was sand placed in the funnel?

Can sugar be separated from water by filtrction?
Name another way of purifying water.

Sao Nom



--- Page 55 ---
Apparatus: "ings that are used in an experiment.

Compound : - mixture which consists of two or more elements.

Elements : substance that cannot be broken down into simpler
substances by chemical means.

Impure > containing something not clean,

Mixture > two ormore things put together,

Pure > not mixed with anything,

Purify > t

“ remove dirty or harmful substances from something.

d


--- Page 56 ---
nt?
Tools

Introduction

Tools are made to make our work easy. We now k “ow what materials are
used to make different tools. Let us make our ov/n tools using materials
that can be found in our environment.

A. Classification of tools

Anotida and Tino use different tools at home. 'he tools are used at
different places. The tools are used in the garden, in the kitchen or for
Suilding.

Name the tools

‘\ |
|

|
|
Kitchen Utensils |

\ jf
\ Jog

Cleaning Tools

Building Tools

tH



--- Page 57 ---
Activity

Draw achartlike the one and write names of tools given in the

: ) picture. Tell your teacher why you put the tools under different
groups.

© @ ®
©"...

1. State the Uses Of the toals in the table below.
Too! Use

‘pliers
shovel |

Scissors cuiting

FF |
ewer

Bottle opener | _
Shoe polish tir —— ;
ladder _ Climbing |

(8. Tool design and models

Name the following tools and state the material they are made of.

| —

_ -- —.

|

:



--- Page 58 ---
i oe

Destiny is good at making her own tools. The teu.cher asked her to draw
a tool she wanted to make. Tools are made of di''erent materials. Tell the
class what each tool in the picture is made of.

Activity

i FR ao

“~ “s¥) Draw the tool you like to use in the gurden or when building.
L da Make the too! and put it in your classioom. What is your tool
_ used for? Name the materials used t«: make your tool.

ef C ©
Ee" oe“. ED

fee

1. A____ is used to open tins.
A. bottle B. can C. spoon D. Can opener
2. Which tool is used to cut trees?
A. hoe B. axe Cc. spade D. spanner
3. Which of the following is not a metal?
A. stick B. spoon C. pot D. tin
4. A__ canbe used to cut papers.
A. pen B. spoon C. bottle D. scissors
5. A__igs avery strong material.
A. metal B. wood C. plastic D. clay

Identify tools that you can make.

Collect materials to make them.

Make a sketch or drawing of the tool,

* Start making the tool.

* Display and choose the best that ca be sold to get money.

ha
/
fo
e es



--- Page 59 ---
|

ce =S

} Bb)

yh, Ps Wha am I?

1. 1am very sharp, | can cut you if not handied carefully. | have two
sides, Who am |?

2. like trees s- much. My body is usually made of wood and my head
is Made of iron. | am also very sharp. Who am 1?

3. They use me to Cut through things. | cut with my two legs. Be careful
with me. Wno am |?

4. [make it easy to open tins. Who am |?

-Opy and complete the crossword puzzle below by
vriting a letter in each unshaded box,

__H _ |

Going down: © too! We use tO Chop a tree.
Going across: 4 too) We use to dig the garden,

Glossary

Material: something that you use to make something with,

Metal : Ahard strong materia! like gold, silver, iron or tin,

Pliers > foo! used to hold metal objects tightly.

Pure * something made of one material only like fresh milk from
a cow,

Sketch > plan

Tyre liver : tool for opening tyres.


--- Page 60 ---
meee Ut]

Structures

Introduction

As you have learnt before, structures are mad: of different materials.
They are used for different purposes such as for :\ielter and storage.

ee
A. Structures for people's shelter found ct home )

“hare are different tyoes of structures at home. In ural areas people build
ferent structures but in urban areas they at tires build one structure.
Everything is in that structure. These are called f ouses. Toilets and bath
‘Dams are inside the house in towns.

‘ame the structures,



--- Page 61 ---
9 ae 2
om “Activity Name and draw structures found at your home.

r
P

e
Rie @ @ @
© ¢ «

1. Structures are used for and .
2. Name any three structures found at home.

B. Structures for animals at home

some structures are ade for animals. At home we have different kinds of
structures for the shelter of animals. We keep animals in these structures to
protect them from t! ives. These structures also help prevent them from
destroying People’s crops and gardens. The structures at home which
are used for animals are kraals, pigsties, fowl runs, kennels and stables.
Cok. i

re ¥ Activity Discuss with your frend other structures for animals
, found at your homes,

‘i
i

r.
Pre Ff @ €
e© @ €

Which animals are kept in these structures numbered 1 to 4?



--- Page 62 ---
(C. Structures used for storage.

—- "Ss = ——

some structures at home are used to store different things. These things
include grain, tools, equipment, agricultural inputs like fertilisers and
chemicals, The structures for that use include tiiose shown below.

™

1. What are structures?

2. Which three things are structures used for?

3. Name two struciures used by people at honie.
4. Which two structures are used for storing thir 9s?

~“


--- Page 63 ---
5. Where are these animals kept at home?
a) Cattle b) Chicken

Cc) Pigs
d) Dogs ©) Horses or donkeys

Granary Q structure used for storing crop grain like maize.
Material ls a thing used to make an object
Structure:

objects built by people for shelter and storage purposes.


--- Page 64 ---


--- Page 65 ---
Ss Uit ])] —
Energy

Introduction

People need energy fo jump, walk, breathe, work or think. Energy is used

in many places like 1omes, industries and transport. There are different
types of energy.

(A. What is energy? )

Energy is the power that either moves or pulls things, Energy is power that

comes from coal, solar, electricity and gas, Energy makes machines work
and gives us heat and light.

Look at these pictures. What are they?

Find out other SOLICes and
your teacher,

forms of energy and discuss them with

— |


--- Page 66 ---
- =

Energyisthe sto move or pull things.

A. machines _ B. coak Cc. powe! D. electricity
2. Energycancome from

A. coal B. heat C. light D. movement
3. Energy givesus sand light.

A. sun B. fun Cc. gas D. heat
4. Energy makesmachines

A. grow B. work C. stop D. fun
5. What gives us light?

A. coal B. the sun C. stones D. strength

{ B. Uses of energy )

energy can be used for cooking or heating an lighting. In rural areas
and some places in town people use solar enc igy. Electricity is also a
‘orm of energy which also gives us heat and ligt.

Nome the pictures.



--- Page 67 ---
switch on electricity and see what happens to the electricity bulb. What
happened?

Why does the light c ome on?

The cell phone will work if you put electricity in it (charge it). If you switch
it on, It lights up. You can see light energy in the cell phone.

An electric stove becomes hot if you switch it on. Heat energy is used
when cooking.

Group work demonstrating how clothes are ironed,
Show the class ow to plug on a radio,

Explain to the class how a TV is connected to.a wall plug.
Show the class ow to switch on a stove.

How do you charge a cell phone?

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

wig& @ ©

Give two uses of energy.

What do we cai! energy from the sun?

When cooking ve uses energy.

What can sola: 2nergy be used for?

When you switch on electricity, what happens to the light bulb?

Pon >

Computer : electronic device for storing and processing data,
Electricity : charged energy supplied for lighting, heating etc.
Energy : power to do something.



--- Page 68 ---
Eee Unit |?)

Fuels

Introduction

Fuels are materials that give out light and hea! when you burn them.
Examples of these are wood, coal, paraffin anc petrol. These fuels are
used to power trains, cars, tractors, grinding mill: and cooking stoves.

( A. Forms of fuel }

What does your family use for cooking? Do you ¢ 20k using firewood, gas
or electricity?

PDs | Gas | Paraitfin

What can you see in the pictures? Tell the class what you do to use the
energy?

aes


--- Page 69 ---
Firewood, paraffin, petrol and diesel are all fuels. some fuels are solid but
others are liquid. Gas is another form of fuel,

Activity

Write fuels your know under each name in the chart.

Solid fuel
Firewoor!

Liquid fuel
Paraffin

Gas

Mother wants to boi some water. She is lighting up a gas stove. Where
is the gas? What will happen to the gas?

Paraffin and fire

It is dark in the hut anc Emily is lighting up a paraffin lamp. Lizwe is making
G fire for her mother t» cook some food.



--- Page 70 ---
PY
@® @ 6
Sm~™

What do you use for lighting a lamp?

Name the fuel found in the lamp.

Why does Lizwe use grass and twigs to start ci fire?

What will happen to the paraffin and wood «after some time?
We use paraffin in lamps and

OPpen>

B. Renewable and non-renewable fuels |

Some fuels never get finished. They can be replaced. People can plant
more trees so that they get wood. Fuels like wood are renewable.
Firewood is a renewable fuel because we can «jrow more trees. Why is
solar energy renewable?

Other fuels get finished, They can not be replaced. Itis difficult to get the
fuel again. Fuels that get finished are non-renev able.

Activity

Ask your teacher to give you renewa >le and non-renewable
fuels. Draw a table and write the fue s under renewable and
non-renewable.

Renewable fuel Non-renewablie fuel

Wood Gas

a

@0° o‘« ‘« Baateises

1. Fuels that can be replaced are called
2. List 2 examples of non-renewable fuels.
3. List 2 examples of renewable fuels.

:

|
, |


--- Page 71 ---
Energy

Fuel
Liquid
Solid
Twig

-Ower to move or pull things.

Sy material that can be burnt to Produce heat and light.
“substance that flows freely,

strongly made (not liquid or gas),

s™ all thin branch that QIOWS On a larger branch on a tree,



--- Page 72 ---
This section covers what you did in the past five weeks.

Paper |
Read the questions carefully and choose the correct answer.
1. Which material is man-made?

A. tree B. door Cc. water D. sfone
2. Natural materials were made by .

A. people B. man C. school: D. God
3. A is a structure for people's shelter.

A. house B. kraal

Cc. kennel D. shed
4. Wecan make water clear by

A. pouring B. washing C. drinkinc D. filtration
5. Choose a kitchen tool.

A. hoe B. spade Cc. axe D. fork
6. A storage structure found in the rural areas is 9 ;

A. stable B. silo Cc. granar D. pigsty
7. Why is a knife sharp?

A. So that it can cut. B. So that it can dig,

C. So that it is light to carry. D. So tha? itis shiny

8. Why isit good to carry tools carefully?

A. Because they are new,

B. So that we do not hurt ourselves.

B. So that we use them

D. So that we put them in the storeroom.
9. Structures are made from

A. air B. water C. dust D. materials
10. Energy in a cell phone is stored in the
A. light B. charger Cc. voice D. battery


--- Page 73 ---
11. If you switch on a TV you see pictures because there Is

A. screen B. light C. picture
12. Paraffinisa__fuel.,

A. gas B. solid C. liquid
13. Petrol is used ir

A. televisions 8B. stoves C. lights
14, more trees for firewood,

A. Cut B. Grow Cc. Burn
15. Which fuel is o solid?

A. diesel B. petrol Cc. gas
Paper 2

Answer all questions.

16. a)

17.

b)
Cc)

Q)
b)
C)

D.

D.

sound

heat

cars

Eat

coal

What Is used for mixing mud when building a house?

Give one example of an impure material.
Explain how water is filtered using a sand filter.

solar enerqy is the energy from the
Which two ‘hings are kept in a store room?
Give two uses of fuels.

(1)
(1)
(3)

(1)
(2)
(2)


--- Page 74 ---
Electricity and Electronics |



--- Page 75 ---
Unit (4
Electricity and electronics

Introduction

In Zimbabwe many people use electricity. They use electricity to light
their homes and stree’s. Electricity should be used carefully as it can be
dangerous. People use devices or gadgets which use electricity. These
are called electronic devices,

Electronic devices }

We see and use electronic devices everywhere. They use electricity for

them to function. Thin« of any electronic devices that use electricity at
home.

‘

Name the electronic devices shown below.

a | Explain how the devices in the above picture are used.

__ a


--- Page 76 ---
Toys are also electronic devices. They use electri ity. The electricity in
toys comes from batteries. Look at the pictures below, they show some
toys. Can you identify these toys? Talk about these: foys with your friend,

Look at Tawana, Chloe, Praise and Reco. They aie using computer Toys
in their classroom. The computer foys use electricity which comes from
batteries, Can you use these toys?

to fun ction.

1. Every electronic device uses
2. Name three devices you know that use elev tricity.

3. Name and draw any two electronic device 5.

oa a
1

7



--- Page 77 ---
B. Sources of electricity )

There are many ¢! aces where electricit

Power Station anc: <ariba Power Station
in Zimbabwe.

y is made in Zimbabwe. Hwange
are the main sources of electricity

Look at the picture below. Talk about it. What is happening in the picture?

This is a very big dani. It ls called Karib
wall is used for making electricity.

a Dam, Water falling from the dam



--- Page 78 ---
There are many other small ones namely, Munya: Power Station, Harare
Power Station and Bulawayo Power Station.

Generators are also a source of electricity. We can use them at our
nomes. Generators use petrol or diesel.

Generator

We can also produce electricity using battery celis. We can find these in
the shops or on the streets.

The sun also gives us electricity called solar energy We use solar panels to
get this electricity. Tne diagram below shows the sun and a solar panel.


--- Page 79 ---
a _

The diagram belowisg Map of Zimbabwe, The map shows places where
electricity is Mace,
————__

Harare
Thermal Power

Hwange Station
Therma! Power Munyati
Station Thermal Power

Station

Bulawayo
Thermal Power
Station



--- Page 80 ---
How does electricity come to your home?

>

! ; ee @

€* °.°o « GD
Name 2 uses of electricity.

Name 2 places where we can find sources of clactricity in Zimbabwe?

l{ we do not have electricity, what else can We Ise to light our homes?

B & NP

The energy from the sun is energy.

(C. Dangers of electricity

People need to use electricity carefully because i! |s dangerous. Electricity
can kill people.

~~



--- Page 81 ---


--- Page 82 ---
Mr Oliver is talking to the children. He is pointing c! electricity wires. What
do you think he is saying? Pretend you are Mr Oli er, Tell the class about
the dangers of elecitic wires.

Activity

Draw signs that tell people about the dangers of electricity. Ask your
teacher to show you dangerous electrical poir is in the home and at
school. Talk about what can be done to avoid be? g Injured by electricity.
Work in groups to write sentences about how to ‘void electric dangers.

Why should electricity be used carefully?

What can electricity do to people?

Electricity can houses,

What can be done to avoid being injured b / electricity?
Name one dangerous electrical point in the home.

aPen >



--- Page 83 ---
Electricity

Electrocuted

Injured
Solar energy

: is a form of energy that flows in devices, Without

electricity, some devices do not function,

: 10 be killed by electricity,
Electronic devices :

gadgets or things which use electricity for them to
work.

> urt.
: alectricity from the sun.



--- Page 84 ---
mes Unit (5

Electrical conductors and insulators

Introduction

Electricity moves from the source To OUT homes. As we said in the last
chapter, sources of electricity in Zimbabwe inclucis Kariba and Hwange.
Electricity travel from these areas through wires which are called
conductors.

G & B. Electrical conductors and Insulatois

Materials which allow electricity to pass through them are called
conductors. Most metals are conductors of elect icity. What about those
materials which do no conduct electricity? Whci are they called? Well,
these are called insulators. Most plastics are insulators of electricity.

Name all the things shown on the picture. What ore they used for? Work
in groups to find out which of the above things allow electricity to go
through them.


--- Page 85 ---
Activity

Which materials can be used to cover electricity wires? Why
are electricity wires covered?

Carry out an experiment to identify electrical conductors
b ON insuictors. Use q battery, bulb and the necessary
CONNECtions to test the various materials.

With the assistance of your teacher:

* Find materials that Can Conduct heat from the sun
* Collect them

* Make a solar coc ker

* Test if if works

* Make tea for the feachers

* Display and Prepare to sell your gadget

* Calculate cost and put a mark up.

Oo eee
mom)
Materials which transmit electricity are called
List any 3 materia): which conduct electricity,

Materials which CO not transmit electricity are called
List any 3 materials which cannot transmit electricity.

Pen -



--- Page 86 ---
Conductors
Gadget
Insulators

Transmit

materials which allow electricity to pass through them

a tool.

materials which do not allow electricity to pass through

them.

to allow something to pass thro.igh.



--- Page 87 ---


--- Page 88 ---
nee Ut (6 —

Forces and magnets

Introduction

in our day to day life there are gadgets that v2 use. Some of these
gadgets contain magnets. Magnets are used or different purposes.
identify these PUTPOSes.

A. What are magnets?

Magnets are objecis that produce an area of magnetic force called
magnetic field. You cannot see the magnetic | eld with your eyes. Iron
fillings can be used io snow magnetic fields wht. magnets create.

Magnets have Two ands that are called North ale (N) and South pole
5), Magnets come in different types. For exampl«: WE have bar magnets.
morse snoe magnets, fing magnets, disc or circuiar magnets. cylindrical
magnets and U-shaped magnets. Can you identily these types of magneis
in the picture below?



--- Page 89 ---
oo

Magnets have certuin things they cannot attract like glass, wood and

plastics. They howey ar attract certain types of metals such as iron, nickel!
and cobalt.

some metals are no: stHracted to magnets, These include copper, silver,
gold, magnesium, PBaitinum and aluminium.

Magnets can attra objects or push them away. The poles are the

Magnet's strongest p sints. Around the two poles, we have what is called
the magnetic field.



--- Page 90 ---
The same poles of two magnets will repel or push each other away. If
different poles are put together, they attract or | ull together.

ss a
<< — ee

~  Repe

<<, as

Magnets are useful in the generation of electricity in hydroelectric dams
like Kariba. They are also used in compasses whic” give direction to ships.

Activity
With the assistance of your teacher, take twc magnets and do the
following:

1. Bring the North pole of the first magnet to the South pole of the second
magnet. Observe what happens.

2. Bring the North pole of the first magnet to the f/orth pole of the second
magnet. Observe what happens.

3. Bring the South pole of the first magnet to the South pole of the second
magnet. Observe what happens.

Oy -

1. State two uses of magnets.
2. The area of magnetic force is called a mag! atic


--- Page 91 ---
CO

3. State any two types of magnets?
4. Which two metals are attracted to magnets?
5. What is the nome of the two ends of the same magnet?

B. Devices with magnets

People use many electronic devices with magnets at home and at
their work places Below are some of the examples of devices that use
magnets, Look at the pictures below, they show some of the devices
which have magnets. Can you name other devices?

* Watches: the magnets in watches are there to move the minute
| hands and the hour hanas,

* Cell phones: there are speakers that use magnets to produce sound
in cell phones

* Computers: the magnets are put in them for storing data on hard
drives, The macnets also help in the display of images. In computers,
there are speakers that also Use magnets to produce sound.

* Radios: radios have speakers that have built in magnets so that they
make sound.

* Televisions: television soeakers contain magnets that help like in radios
to produce sound.

* Generators: they rely or depend on magnets to produce power that
we use at homes and at work.

* Acompass: this has magnetic force In itso that it will always point to
the North,


--- Page 92 ---
| “*) Activity & Homework

Look around the school and identify things that .ave magnets in them
Explain how they use the magnets.

Make alist of all devices that you use at home. Fram the list identify those
devices that have magnets inside them. Find ou’ what the uses of those
magnets are for, Write your answers in your hom=work book.

1. Most electronic devices have in the rn. (magnets / data)

2, People use many electronic at homie. (devices / magnets)
3. Intadios, magneis help the speakers to make . (sound / nolse)
4. Generators use magnets to produce . (power / water)

5. Inacompass the arrow must always point tc. the-<North / South)

(C & D. Illustrating magnetic force

There are so many ways to illustrate magnet!. force, These include
separating iron objects from sand by using a magnet and placing a
magnet near metal objects.

Experiment

Separating meial objects from soil.

Apparatus: different metal objects, magnet, soll and plastic
container.

» Putsome soilin a plastic container such as a piastic plate or a beaker.

* Mix the soil with different metal objects suc” as jron nails, pins and
bottle tops.

* Take the magnet and place if abave the container.

* Observe what happens and record your observations in your book.


--- Page 93 ---
Activity

In twos pick a magnet and go outside the classroom. Move the magnet

through the soil and see: if any metal objects get attracted to the magnet.
Do this in the presenc« of your teacher.

€) 0°.

1. Magnetic force con be shown in

ways.

A. two B three C. many D. four
2. The magnet has —__sipoles.

A. three B two C. many D. five
3. Fromsanda magnst is able to pick objects.

A. metal B. wooden C. paper D. plastic

4. Praise took a mag;
think happened?
A. the metal pins \vere attracted
B. the metal pins were repelled
C. nothing happe ied
D. the metal pins : lisappeared

et and placed it above metal pins. What do you

—aaee S


--- Page 94 ---
5. Magnets are to people.
A. useless B. tasteless C. dangerous D, useful

Glossary

Ls.

Attract - when a magnet pulls metal oojects to it.

Force : isthe push or pull applied or an object.

Magnet : an object that produces an urea of magnetic force
called magnetic field.

Magnetic field < anarea where a magnet con able to attract metal
objects.

Magnetic poles : the two opposite ends of a magnet.

Repel - when same poles of two nagnets are brought

together and push each oller away.


--- Page 95 ---
Design and Technology
NENG on ey
'

|

A BA A
:

a


--- Page 96 ---
Elements of desian

We need to use our brains to think up new things Everything that we use
daily is a special design by someone clever like you. Look at the patterns
in your uniform, Check the things in your classroorr. They did not just come
up. Someone designed them.

(A. Elements of design _

Now let us have a look at the designs below anc let us discuss them,

ra

ac aes
© (yp) CAAA tl

’ Jey Pay
wo Vie ;
| Activity

|

* Let us go out to the garden or any place of your choice around the
school.

Draw one thing you have found there.
* Consider the natural colours you see around you.

Collect any material that can be used fo; moulding e.g. paper
mache, clay and plasticine.

zslow are artefacts that were used long ago. They used mud to mould
"hese things. They also used clay, grass and woud from the trees. They
always used materials found around them.



--- Page 97 ---
ft
Me © C& e

w
e® 6@e @

ma

1,
2.

3.

>

5.

Draw a hut and show the door, windows and the roof. Use colour so
that it is easy to see the door, windows, walls and the roof.

Write names of materials you can use to make acavea comfortable
place to live in

What is. an artefact?
Give two examples of artefacts made long ago.
Artefacts were made using , and

{ B. Manipulation of materials )

There are many materials that can be used to make models of things

people see in the environment. Materials that can be used to make
different models for example

(i)
(il)
(ili)

newspapers and old magazines,
Plasticine

clay.

Artefacts from paper mache
How to make paper mache

Take plenty of old newspapers,

Tear them into shreds and put them in a container with water.
Mix them until the shreds are semi-solid (porridge like),

Make sure tha: the paper mixture is smooth.

— tt
i er cr


--- Page 98 ---
Things that can be made from paper mache

Activity

Draw a cow and a blair toilet using p oper mache.

1. Name two materials that are used to make -aper mache.

2. Name two things that can be found in your ocal environment.

3. What is a design?

4. Amaterial that looks like clay which is used |) mould things is called

5. What are artefacts used for?

C. Designs for decoration

Artefacts are useful to everyday living. Artefaci: can be used for many
ourposes including decorations. Different design’. nake places beautiful

a nenmemmmmmnamarnss =a


--- Page 99 ---
>
© e ¢€
FJ} *%e e e (Exereleem
1, Name two things tnat are used to decorate your Classroom.

2. Name two things that are used to decorate your home.
3. Decorations are good because they moke places look b ful,

—_

ee, Let us see what you can make.

,

; Collect materials such as mud, newspapers for paper mache,
plasticine,

* Make artefacts of your choice.
* Display and exhib)’ your artefacts.

Artefact + a thing made by people, for example, a tool used by
peoyle long ago.

Design : @ diawing or an outline from which something
maybe made.

Mould * Something made by hands, either from soil or plasticine.

Paper mache : mixtiire of Paper and water.

Plasticine * material similar to clay which does not harden and is
usec for moulding.

Technology : application of science to practical tasks. .

94


--- Page 100 ---
Choose the correct answer from A, B, C or D.
1. We get electricity fromm a dam called
A. Mutirikwi B. Bangela
Cc. Mzingwane D. Kariba

——_

Study the picture below and use it to answer question 2.

y Fi

2. This isa
A. dam B. powe station
Cc. solar panel * DPD. schoc!
3. Electricity is used for. ;
A. eating B. cooki'g
Cc. wearing D. diggi 3
4. Electricity does not travel through _
A. wife B. iron


--- Page 101 ---
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

C. wood D. metal
Magnets cannot attract .
A. glass B. nickel

C. iron D. cobalt
Which materic! was used to make pots long ago?
A. sand B. clay

C. wood . D. stone
Patterns on artefacts are made for
A. fun B. playing

C. decoratior D. people

To push some*hing away by a magnet is to

A. attract B. pull

C. repel D. punch
Where does a tiver start?

A. ina valley B. ina dam

C. inalake D. ina high place
Water sinks into the soil through a process called
A. infiltration B. run-off

C. water flow D. irrigation

Why does water infilttate sandy soil quickly?
A. because it has dead plants 8. because it keeps heat

C. because it has humus D. becauseit haslarge soil particles
Which is the bic gest natural source of water?
A. adam B. a river
C. anocean D. alake
A is an example of man-made source of water.
A. river B. lake
C. dam D. pond
How do people get underground water?
A. by irtigatior B. by digging wells
Cc. by building cams D. by building lakes.
Lightning can ki people and ;
A. dam walls B. animols
C. crops D. water
C96 |


--- Page 102 ---
moe Ui (9

Properties of water

introduction

Water is one of the most important and common ' ibstances in the world.
lt is found in many sources and in different forms. Water is needed by
both plants and animals. Without water there Is! life.

{ A. Properties of water

There are certain things that tell us that a liquid we have is water.

* Water is colourless.

* Water does not have a smell.

> Water is tasteless.

- Water takes the shape of the container.

» Water flows from a high place to a low plac -.
- Water sinks into the ground.

* Water makes things wet.

L!

mtontainer with water Mil

.
e.

Activity

~ | In your groups explain the properties of water.

se


--- Page 103 ---
® @e
pA
What colour is water?
How does wate: taste?

Which two groups of things need water?

What happens jo people if they don’t have water?
What shape is water?

B. Water flows from a higher to a lower place

Do you have a rive: or stream in your area? In what direction does the
water flow to? Why”

PON =

Water flows from a higher place. A place where a tiver starts is called its
source. Most rivers cind streams have their sources in higher places like
hills and mountains Their waters flow to lower places like valieys,

Identify higher places in your area where water flows to lower areas,
* Find a place around the school where land slopes are available.

ee _


--- Page 104 ---
* Use arain can to pour woter.
* Observe how the water flows,

Where does water flow to?

Where do most rivers start?

Water flows frormna higher placetoa es Face.
Name one lower place that water can flow !o.
Can water flow up a mountain?

What do we call a place where a river starts ’

C. Water infiltration

Where does water go after it has rained?

cSarwnn>

After raining some water sinks into the grour 4. This water will form
underground water. The process by which wate: on the ground surface
enters the soil is called infiltration. If the rains are fF eavy some of the water
will flow on the ground surface. This water is call=d run-off.

Activity

Identify and discuss places in your c'ea where infiltration is
quick and where it is slow.



--- Page 105 ---
» In your groups, go into the school garden or yard, Collect some
"water in a can and pour it on the dry soil surface. What do
#£% you see? What happens to the water on the ground? Are you
able to collect it from the ground and put if back into the can?

(D. A water filter |

If you pour dirty water in a water filter, you will get clean water in the
container because tie dirty is filtered by the sand, gravel, small and big
stones.

When it rains this is hoy, water moves down underground. When it reaches
a hard rock It collects as groundwater. We can bring this water to the
surface by digging wells or sinking boreholes.

Designing a water filter

We can observe water infiltration by making our own model of a water
filter. We need a 2 litre plastic bottle, 2 water containers or bea kers, some
clay and sandy soil, gravel, small stones and big stones,

Cut open the bottom part of the Plastic bottle container and turn it upside
down. Fill the bottle with large stones at the bottom then small stones,
followed by the gravel, then the sandy soil and finally the clay soil,

| Beaker (container) —

Ditty water —+4

Sand sol.
| ~ Clay soil
| orevel Hall-cut 2 litre bottle |
| Small stones ——~
Cotton wool
Big stone: —

Beaker (container)

~~ Clean water



--- Page 106 ---
Pid

E o Make a model of a water filter in your group using available
ey materials. Do this outside the classrovn.

Cre* oo °.

in

Choose the correct answer

1. Themovement of water from the surface to 1 ie underground is called

’

A. well B. borehole C. infiltrction D. water filter
2. Water which does not sink but flows on the ground is called

A. run-off B. infiltration C. fastel=ss D. vegetation
3. In which soll type does water move down cuickly?

A. clay B. sandy Cc. allso:: D. bare soil
4. Which of the following protects the soll from) heavy rain?

A. soil particles B. ground water Cc. grave! D. vegetation

5. Why does water infiltrate quickly in forestec areas?
A. because plant roots loosen the soil
B. because people do not live there
C. because animals live there
D. because there are few animals
6. How can we bring groundwater to the surface?
A. by growing crops B. by siricing a borehole
C. by protecting the water D. by pianting trees.

= Get soil samples from different pla: es in your area. Fill your
~ model filter with different samples at a time. Observe and
record how water filters in each of |e samples.



--- Page 107 ---
GAME ’ Crossword Puzzle

5 = Complete the crossword puzzle below as shown on
2 ; number 4 across

CLUES
Across

1. The process by which water on the ground surface enters the soil,
4. Wecan get ground water by digging a
5. A source of wate:.

Down

2. Water flows from 4 higher place tog place.
3. Rivers flow from _ Places to lower places.

Glossary

Colourless : with no colour, }
Infiltrates =: sinks ciown,
Observe : look a7 something carefully. :
Slope : grounc! that goes down-wards, ”
Tasteless : with no taste. |
an
eee


--- Page 108 ---
Es Unit 2) —

Sources of water

Introduction

After raining water collects in a number of places. People, animals and
plants may use the water collected. Some wo vr may collect on the
ground surface while some may collect under grc und. There are different
sources of water.

A. Natural sources of water

Do you have natural sources of water in your area © Can you name these?

Examples of natural sources of water are strearr s, rivers, PONS, springs,
iakes, seas and oceans.

™_

These sources of water form on their own withou' the help of people.

Ponds have a small amount of water compared 10 the rest, They usually
form in the rainy season. In the rural areas they may have some water
up to the dry season and then It dries up. Domestic animals may drink
from them.


--- Page 109 ---
Streams flow into riv rs.
EP

+4

IN turn, some tivers nay flow through lakes on their way to seas and
oceans. Oceans ar: the biggest natural sources of water.



--- Page 110 ---
Springs usually form on mountain sides where waier maybe coming out
from the side of fhe mountain or under it.

en > \

et’ e?| Activity

' | Discuss the different uses of water from ratural sources.

© @ @
“oe « Exercise
A is a natural source of water,
Streams flow into
The biggest natural sources of water are

uses natural sources of water.
have small amounts of water.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

{B. Man-made sources of water )

Can you think of man-made sources of water in y -ur area?

Examples of man-mace sources of water include c.ims, wells, boreholes.
reservoirs, and canals


--- Page 111 ---
* People build © construct these sources of water, Dams are constructed
on rivers. They keep a lot of water.

* Wells, boreholes and handpumps have their source of water under
the ground,

* People dig wells and sink boreholes to bring underground water to
the surface.

* Canals are built by people to carry water from a river or dam to far
away fields fo: irrigation,

dc. Design a model of a man-made source of water |}

we 2) Activity

eS Pa 1S

meray

| * 4 Discuss what people in your area do to have underground
water.

IN pairs design a model of a man-made source of water of
your choice,

e¢ @ @
lee

1. Examples of rnan-made sources of water are

2. Dams are constructed on
3. Waterin wells and boreholes comes from

e and

A. above the ground B. under the ground
4, are built to carry irrigation water,
5. Canals are built by People to carry water from a of


--- Page 112 ---
Ue Natural sources of water, forexampie,

* Undergrouna water can be brought tothe surface
rough digging wel

GS sources of wate 1, for
Sholes, weils and others,

Domestic animals. animals we keep at home like c ; ttle.
Man-made * Created or built by people,

Natural * NOt created or bullt by People bit by God.
Source ‘ place from which something is o! tained.

Spring - G@ place where water comes n sturally to the
surface from underground,

Reservoir - Man-made lake USEd for Storing w ater.

“09 ]


--- Page 113 ---
ees Ut 2)

Water and environment

Introduction

Water supports all life on earth. It is the most common liquid on earth, It

can also destroy life and property. There are many dangers or hazards
that can be caused ty water, We must all be ready for these hazards
and try to prevent ther.

A & B. Water hazards

There are many dancers or hazards that may be caused by water.
Crossing flooded rivers can be dangerous. People may drown if they try
to cross flooded rivers A number of people especially school children
drown in tivers, dams ond pools trying fo swim or cross.



--- Page 114 ---
Flooded rivers destioy homes and drown peor ie in low areas where
homes are near the tivers.

in Zimbabwe, a national disaster, The Tokwe Mu.osi flooding, occurred
in February 2014, after heavy rainfall in Masvingv Province. The Tokwe
Mukosi Dam partially collapsed and over 1 500 far ilies were left homeles:
and had to be relocated to Chingwizi Transit Ca op in Mwenedi.

e
’ me
7

Look al the photos below? What happened to the houses? Can something
be done to prevent this from happening?



--- Page 115 ---
Open wells or pits are also dangerous to people and animals,

Lightning may kill people and animals. Boiling water may burn or scald
people especially children if it Spills. :

Activity

Identify wa'er hazards in the environment. Talk about water
hazards in your area. Watch a video on the dangers of water,

w eee
1. What is a hazard?

2. Whatcanbe destroyed by strong winds and hailstones?
3. Give two groups co: things that can be killed by lightning,

——

Lt ete. pe]

a eS ee...

35


--- Page 116 ---
4. What can destroy dam walls?
5. Why should people never cross flooded rivers?

What do people in your area do to prevent wate: nazards? The following
can help people to prevent or reduce dangers “aused by water,

1. People should never cross flooded rivers. It is safe to use on bridges
or wait until the water level is low.



--- Page 117 ---
3. Fencing tight round swimming pools and locking the gate prevents
children from a: awning in the swimming pools. If you cannot swim do
not get into a swimming pool unless a life saver is present.

4. Donot pour ho! water in buckets whe

|

n children are close.

5. In the kitchen, po! handles must not be turned outwards on the stove,



--- Page 118 ---
Activity

Talk about one Common water hazard i!: your area and say
what you think should be done.

1. People should build homes on land to prevent their homes
from flooding.

Name two dangers which can be caused by water?
Which is a safe place to cross a flooded river?

4. What advice would you give to your mother who is cooking in the
kitchen about boiling pots on the stove?

5. People who cross flooded rivers may

Find pictures of water hazards and make a picture frieze
> (wall painting). Display these in your classroom.

_ GAME Puzzle Game
- >

ye 4. Complete the crossword puzzle on ine next page.
~"l > Number 3 down has been done fo you.

“td



--- Page 119 ---
CLUES
Across

1. When ativer’s water overflows the banks.
4. A water channe!.

5. A flooded river < an homes and crops.

Down

2. Never build your home on ground.

3. A person after being carried away by flooded river.

Glossary

Constructing : building.

Disaster : something that happens suddenly and causes
much suffering or loss, for example, a flood
and fire.

Drown : death caused by water.

Environment : the surroundings in which we live,

Floods : covering of land by water,

Safety precautions : ways to prevent harm.

Scalds : burns caused by boiling water.

Transit Camp : atemporary home for people escaping from a

dangerous situation,

:


--- Page 120 ---
Weather and Climate
:
|

all oer ee
4

‘ |



--- Page 121 ---
ee Unit 2)

Weather elements

Introduction

Weather is the hotness or coldness of a place, the amount of rainfall, the
level of sunshine, the cloud cover, how windy it is and so on. We can tell
what the weather will 5e like by looking at the sky. If the sun is shining, we
know it is going to be hot. At times our bodies fell us what the weather
will be like. If It is going to be cold, we feel it.

(A. Weather patterns )

Weather can change easily with time. It can be cold in the morning,
then it becomes warrn and even hot by midday. !t may at times rain in
the afternoon on the same day, The direction and speed of the wind
can also change dur ng the day. There may also be changes at night
on the same day.

During different seasons we can have drought and storms that can turn
to disasters. Storms can destroy buildings. Find out more about these
problems caused by weather.

We can also study weather changes and see that during such months as
september and October it can be very hot. From November to February
there is o lot of rainfall and it is warm. From March to May it becomes
cool and we have less rainfall. Lastly, in June and July it is very cold and
there is no rainfall. Ws call these seasons. Summer season is warm and
wet. Autumnis cool. \/inter season is very cold and dry and spring season
which is hot and dry [nere are four seasons in Zimbabwe.

Let us discuss the diagrams on the next page.


--- Page 122 ---
Write down whet is happening in the pictures above.

Find out how people keep. themselves wa
countries in the world.
Collect pictures showing different weather |

@r0° o*s °o >

Choose the correct answer.

1.

When wesee_ __it will rain on that day
A. dry leaves B. the su
C. dark clouds D. the fc
The trees shake and lose their leaves when
A. raining B. cold ©
Cc. hot D. clouc
We know itis going to be cold when __
A. clouds B. people Cc. trees
The __ season is cold.
A. winter B. autumn C. spring
destroy buildings.
A. Mists B. Disasters Cc. Storm

B. Elements of weather)

Weather is the dally condition of

wind, rainfall, humidity and cloud cover are © =

mn in winter in different

patterns,

ry
inbow

iS ;
ind windy

\s

move around.
D. animals

D. summer!

5 D. Cloud covels

the air around 5S. Temperature, sunshine

led weather elemen’s


--- Page 123 ---
Look at the picture

> below. What is it telling us about the weotner?

eS es
LOOK at Praise and RECO,
wearing big hats? Ww

they are coming from school. Why are they

‘Ny are they not wearing jerseys? What is the weather
like?

eee

a
What is the weather like today? Why is the woman

wearing a big hat?


--- Page 124 ---
Look at the boy above, What is happening? Wr y is the boy’s hat flying
off his head?

P
What is weather?
What are weather elements?
We wearasunhatwhenitis
When do we put on warm clothes?
In the picture above why is the boy’s hat flyin 9 off his head?

ore N >

C. Weather instruments

The weather elements can be measured using ci'ferent instruments. Let
us have a look at the following weather instrume its. Let us discuss what
mney are used for


--- Page 125 ---
Rain gauge sunshine recorder

These instruments are kept at a weather station, Your school should have
a weather station,

e

Go to the weathe station and observe the weather instruments and
identify them.

Field trip - visit a local weather station or meteorological centre. ,

~“e


--- Page 126 ---
1. Name the instrument shown in the diagram bei-w.

2. Atrain gauge is used for measuring
3. A wind vane is used to show direction of
4. We use a thermometer to measure
5. What do we calla Place where weather instrum “nts are kept?
bl ‘ >
- ~ Look back |
2 os
“Sao
June starm weathe July
SMOWS wind vane weathe: «tation
October jersey four umbrella

From the words above, fill-in the spaces in the questions below:
a) In September and ____ It can be very hot.

5) Thereare _ seasons in Zimbabwe,

¢) The months sand —____ can be very cold avd dry.

d) can destroy buildings.

#) When itis raining we need ____ to protect us.

f) is the daily condition of the air around us.

8) In very cold countries it ____— during winter.

~~“



--- Page 127 ---
h) A keeps us warm during winter.
i) We show wind direction with a
j) We find weather instruments at a

Glossary

Disaster - avery bad accident.
Drought ~ along period when there is no rain and the land is
dry.
Instrument a piece of equipment or tool.
Rain gauge instrument used to measure rain.
Storm windy and a very bad weather.
Thermometer Instrument used to measure temperature.
Weather station a place where weather instruments are kept.
Wind vane ._ Instrument used to show wind direction,
Li24]

|



--- Page 128 ---
Es Unit 27>

Weather and climate hazards

Introduction

Sometimes weather can be bad like when there ts too much rain or very
little rain. Heat waves which result in very high temperatures are also
dangerous. Other weather and climate hazards c/e floods, fires, cyclones
and drought.

(A & B. Weather and climate hazards

This is a river.

What is in the river? Why are cars and buses not crossing the river? What
will happen if the cars and buses try to cross [ne river? In Zimbabwe
heavy rainfall in Masvingo, Midlands and Matabeleland South provinces
caused flooding in districts like Gutu, Chivi, Mberengwa, Gwanda ana
Chiredzi in January and February 2014. Dams, biidges, crops and hemes
were destroyed while many tivers overflowed, |'ie Tokwe Mukos! floods

R


--- Page 129 ---
left many people homeless. On 22 February 2000, Cyclone Eline affected
the Eastern and Southern parts of Zimbabwe.

Look at the picture beiow.

The fire is burning the oush. Veld fires are caused by smokers who throw
away cigarette stubs or people clearing land, hunting, harvesting among
others. What are the cinimals and birds doing? At which time of the year
do we have veld fires? What does the fire do to the birds, frees, grass

and animals? People must make fire guards or fire orea ks to prevent fires
from spreading.

Grandmother is looking at her maize crop. Look at the crop. What has
happened to the maize? Why is the crop like this?

SS _


--- Page 130 ---
Effects of weather and climate hazards

* Soil erosion.

+ Siltation of rivers thereby reducing their wate: carrying capacity.
* Burning plants and animals.

* Animals and plants are destroyed.

* Lack of food and water.

« Animals that live in water are destroyed.

In October 2015, Zimbabwe experienced a heat wave. Many people
and more than 77 elephants died.

Talk about the dangers of the sun if it is too hot. P: etend you are a farmer
who grows maize talking to a farmer who keeps cattle. Talk about what
is happening because of too much heat from thie hot sun.

1. If the sun is foo not
A. crops grow well
B. rivers dry up
Cc. there is good grass for cattle to eat
D. animals have plenty of drinking water
2. Big black clouds tell us it might

A. rain B. get hc’
Cc. the sun is about to set D. too much rain has fallen
3. Afireburnsstrongly if st.
A. there is heavy rain B. the grass is dry
Cc. itisacold day D. there sre few clouds in the sky
A. Rivers have a lot of water in the month of
A. June B. Marc)
Cc. September D. Augu:!
5. Look at these pictures, Choose what you can wear for walking In the
mud.

127


--- Page 131 ---
Climate

Cyclone

Drought
Fire guard
Heat wave
Siltation

Submerge
Wilting crop

Make a model of a field with plenty of grass and trees in it.
~, Show a fire guard right round the field. Explain to the class
“| when a fir2 guard is needed most and say why.

Glossary

Ls

average weather conditions in a place over many
years.

extreme large, powerful and destructive rain with
very high winds.

period of no rainfall.

sleared narrow field to prevent fire from spreading.
foo Much heat which lasts for two or more days.

mud, clay or small rocks carried by moving water
and put in rivers and dams.

zover with water.

weak drying plants because of little or too much
water or heat.


--- Page 132 ---
PART A

1.

What must you wear to protect your eyes in ‘ne laboratory?

A. goggles B. clothe:

C. hats D. warm clothes
Accidents in a laboratory can peoples.

A. hide B. cure Cc. harm D. help

Substances used in the laboratory are callec

A. chemicals 8B. food C. drinks D. water
A tree has parts,
A. two B. one Cc. five D. different

Stones are used for building bridges because: they are
A. weak B. loose Cc. strong D. good

A comb is made of
A. plastic B. wood Cc. metal D. grass

Materials that allow heat to. pass through are: called
A. grass B. glass C. condu-tors D. chemicals

We can purify water by
A. conducting B. boiling C. filtratio > D. microscope

something not clean is said to be
A. pure B. impure Cc. correc D. white


--- Page 133 ---
10. Which type of food can cause teeth to decay?

A. sugar B. salt C. butter D. meat

PART B

1. a) Name three paris of a tree. (3)
b) Which part of a tree takes in water? (1)
c) What do you ca! materials created by God? (1)

2. a) Fillin the table bsiow.

Man-Made Materiais Natural Materiats /

(4)

b) Which tool is mode from wood? (1)

3. a) Which two tools are used for digging? (2)
b) Why are tools important? (1)

Cc) (i) A house Is used for , (1)

(ll) A shed is usec for . (1)


--- Page 134 ---
Soil, Plants and Animals

131



--- Page 135 ---
ee Unit 2)

Soil

Introduction

Soil is one of the most important substances on earth. It supports plant
and animal life. Most of our food is grown on soil. It takes many years for
good soil to form. The main types of soil are clay, sand and loam. These
have different prope ties. Covered soil has plant growing on it as well as

dead leaves and piants. It stays damp and soft. Bare (uncovered) soil
has nothing growing on it.

{ A. Soil formation

Where does all this scil come from? What made it?

Soil is formed by the breaking down of rocks and stones. Rocks break
down into small pieces and mix with dead leaves, grass and animal
matter. They form soil Decayed plant matter and animal matter is called
organic matter or humus, There is air and water in the soil.



--- Page 136 ---
The changes in temperature during the day and at night in winter make
rocks break to form soil.

moon

cold night

in winter

—

| cracking and falling & /



--- Page 137 ---
The roots of trees grow ing among rocks break the rocks into smaller pieces
which help to form ts soil.

7.

Water flowing in tive: nove small stones and they rub against each other.
They break down and help to form soil.



--- Page 138 ---
Discuss how you think the soil in your urea was formed.

4 © e @
€ ; {ee e e Be
1. Where does soil come from?

2. Small stones carried by running water in a nver against ecich
other and break to form soil.

3. Which part of a tree breaks rocks?
During the there is heat from the sun.
5. The decayed animal matter in the soil is caliad

B & C. Soil types and properties

What type of soil de you have in your area? Can you name them?
There are mainly three types of soil. These are scind, clay and loam.

Tad)


--- Page 139 ---
Sand soil

Sand soil has large pa ticles. It does not keep moisture. The particles are
not close to one anot?er. If sand soil is rubbed in hands you will feel gritty
and rough, Water sinks in sand soil and washes away all the nutrients.

Clay soil
Pe

Clay soil particles are small and fine. They are close fo each other. Water
sinks slowly in clay sci and it keeps moisture than sand soil. Clay soil is
used for pottery such as clay pots and vessels.

Loam soil



--- Page 140 ---
Loam soil is a mixture of clay and sand soil. Cro)os such as ground nuts
grow well in loam soil.

What happens to water when poured into different types of soil?

Experiment

a tie eee eee
fet <5 e

*
to
= ws
°

nd soll Loar soi

Clay soll

* Collect sand soil, clay soil and loam soil from: the schoo! garden or
anywhere in the school yard.

* Collect 3 beakers and half fill therm with the 2 different soil types you
have collected,

* Pour same amount of water into the 3 soil tyines.
* Observe the time taken by water to sink.
In which soil does water sink faster and slower?

|

fee@ 9 Activity

caren ,
| gl | Collect different soil types. Feel diffe:ent tyoes of soil and

| Observe colour of soll,

(D._ Models from clay }

Use clay soil fo model clay pictures of your own «noice.

aa
| 137


--- Page 141 ---
10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

Cc. wood D. metal
Magnets cannot attract

A. glass B. nickel

Cc. iron D. cobait
Which materic! was used to make pots long ago?
A. sand B. clay

C. wood . D. stone
Patterns on artefacts are made for

A. fun B. playing

C. decoratior D. people

TO push something away by a magnet is to

A. attract B. pull

C. repel D. punch
Where does o iver start?

A. ina valley B. inadam

C. inaglake D. inahigh place
Water sinks inte the soil through a process called
A. infiltration B. run-off

C. water flow D. irrigation

Why does water infiltrate sandy soil quickly?
A. because it tias dead plants B. because it keeps heat

C. because it !:as humus D. becauseithas large soil particles
Which is the biogest natural source of water?
A. adam B. arrive;
C. an ocean D. alake
A is an example of man-made source of water,
A. river B. lake
Cc. dam D. pond
How do people get underground water?
A. by irtigatior B. by digging wells
C. by building iams D. by building lakes.
Lightning can kiil people and ;
A. dam walls B. animals
C. crops D. water
(96)


--- Page 142 ---
lie:

Section B

Answer all questions..

16. a)
b)
17. a)

b)

18. a)
b)

Name 1 town in Zimbabwe where electricity is made. (1)
State any 2 fuels used by generators to rake electricity. (2)
Two materials that can be used to make artefacts are
and. (2)
A___ is acontainer that was used long ago to fetch water.
(1)
Write 2 tyoes of magnets. (2)
Give two natural sources of wafer. (2)


--- Page 143 ---


--- Page 144 ---
wom

Wee

corttresheseeeenteeeeerere



--- Page 145 ---
Droplets
Humus
Loam
Matter
Nutrients
Organic
Particles
Pottery

True/false

1. Water, air, organic and rock particles
farms the soil.

2. Bubbles show that there is water in the
soil,

3. Water sinks slowly in sand soil than in
Clay soil.

4. There is water in the soil.

Glossary

a very sroall amount of liquid.
decayed animal and plant matter.
soil mixture of clay and sand.
material or substance.

foed in the soil given to plants so that they grow well.

animal matter and plant matter.
one part of something.

items suc) as pots made using clay.

Es BE

il


--- Page 146 ---
ees Ut 26

Pianis

Introduction

Plants have different parts like the leaves, stems roots, flowers and fruits.

These parts have different important functions jor the plant.

(A&B. Plant parts and their functions

Can you name the plant parts you know? Whct work do they do?

|

The leaves

Leaves grow on the stem. They make the plert’s food, They moke

air we oreathe in.

-

~


--- Page 147 ---
The roots

Roots take water and ;iant nutrients from the soil. They hold the plant in
the soil so that it does n >t fall. They keep extra food for the whole plant.

The stems

Stems support the plan. They carry water and nutrients from the roots to
all plant parts. They corry food from the leaves to all plant parts.


--- Page 148 ---
Activity

Discuss how the leaves, roots and siams work together to
support piant life.

@r0° oo  « Een.

Which part of a plant makes food?

Which part of a plant makes the air we brec ine?
Where is extra food for the plant stored?

Give two things that roots take from the gro ind.
What does the stem carry from the leaves?
What does the stem carry from the roots?

C & D. Plant parts and their functions

The flowers

Onhkwnh =

Flowers make the fruits. They attract insects ‘> the plant. It is where
pollination takes piace.


--- Page 149 ---
The fruits

Fruits give a covering ‘o the seeds, Fruits can be hard like a monkey
orange (damba), nut o: fleshy like a mango, avocado or apple.

y | Discuss how ‘he flower changes to a fruit.

1. Ina plant, the fruit is made by the
2. Flowersattract _—s—s to the plani.
3. Where do we find seeds ina plant?
4, Give 2 examples oi fruits eaten by people.
5. What makes the fruit?
c
is 9 Hs
Practica)

Find out why insects are attracted to the flower of a plant?


--- Page 150 ---
_ (GAME

~ B)
ey > -, Word Search
—

Find 4 words to do with plants parts. Roots has been done for you.

Attract
Breathe
Nutrients

Pollination:

to cause to draw near.

take oxygen into the lungs.

substances that plants or animc|s need in order to grow.
moving pollen from one plant |. another.


--- Page 151 ---
es Unit 2/7

Animals

Introduction

There are different types of animals. Invertebrates are the most common
ones. They make about 97% of all other animal types.

Invertebrates are animals that do not have a backbone. They do not
have a bone skeleton sither on the inside of their bodies or outside. Some
of the invertebrates he ve bodies filled with a fluid, for example the worm
and jellyfish.

_ Jellyfish |

some invertebrates have a hard outside shell like most insects. Insects
make the biggest number of all invertebrates. Insects have six legs.
some insects have wir gs. Examples of insects are flies, bees, Mosquitoes,
cockroaches, ants, biitterflies and many others.


--- Page 152 ---
F Cockroach | Ant] Butterfly

Other examples of invertebrates include crabs, sn sils, lobsters, octopuses,
starfish, scorpions and spiders.

a Activity

Observe and describe some of the invertebrate animals found
—_ »6dIN your area,

147


--- Page 153 ---
4
; Ld
E> e ¢
~ © @ €
os

1

2.
3.
4

5.

Animals with no backbone are called
make the biggest number of all invertebrates.
3 examples of invertebrates are ; and ;
An example of <n invertebrate whose body is filled with a fluid is a

‘

How many legs do insects have?

(8. Useful insects )

Which insects do you: think are helpful to people? How are they helpful?

some insects are very helpful to people

Some insects are rich in proteins and are used as food. For example, flying
termites (ishwa), flying ants (tsambarafuta), grasshoppers and crickets
(makurwe).

a

gmt —<9

|

a 8



--- Page 154 ---
The ladybird beetle eats aphids in vegetables. Aphids destroy oul
vegetable crops.

Bees make honey that we eat, Butterflies and bes help flowers to make
fruits by carrying pollen. Bees make wax which is used in making cosmetics.

aa> Rs

The silkworm, a larva of a moth, makes silk fibre or people.

Se ot SD
wee Bs
ef bes

Describe and discuss useful insects in your area.


--- Page 155 ---
c e
C x0 °o °.

1. What do bees ma!e?

A. flower B. leaves C. honey D. nectar
2. Theladybirdeats —__in vegetables.

A. aphids B flowers C, leaves D. insects
3. Insectstichin _—s_ are used as food.

A. vitamin B. salts

C. proteins D. carbohyclrates
4. What makes silk fib’9 for people?

A. aphids B. bees C. silk worm D. ant

5. How do ants clean our environment?
A. by eating our furniture
B. by making honey
C. by making silk ‘isre for people
D. by eating up cead plants and animals

(C. Harmful insects |

some insects are harrriful to people, animals and crops. These insects
include termites, locusis, mosquitoes, bed bugs, lice and tsetse fly,

Termites destroy wooden furniture and eat Our crops.

Swarms of locusts can destroy our crops. Look at the pictures below. What
is happening? Discuss with your frlends.


--- Page 156 ---
Mosquitoes bite us and cause us to suffer from rr ularia, Bed-bugs and
lice suck our blood and make us suffer from varios diseases. The tsetse
fly bites animals and people. Tsetse fly causes a ci sease called sleeping
sickness in people.

- 5 . dé
wav ws.

~ Lice (inda) ! Tsetse fly

The housefly spreads diseases. Cockroaches get onto oul food at
night. They carry germs to Our food. Look at th= photos below, Which
food is being eaten by the housefly? Which foo is being eaten by the
cocktoaches? Discuss wifh your friend.



--- Page 157 ---
Seal | Aetvily

—— oe

List some harmful insects found in your area. What can you
do to control them?

4
ee ¢@ ©

1. destroy ou’ wooden furniture.
A. Aphids 8. Termites C. Bees D. Houseflies
2. The causes sleeping sickness.
A. housefly 8. mosquito C. locust D. tsetse fly
3. Mosquitoes spread a disease called
A. bilharzia B. malaria C. diarrhoea =D. cholera
4. Locusts can destroy our
A. bodies 8. crops C. clothes D. blood
5. carry germs to our food.
A. Locusts 8. Mosquitoes C. Lice D. Cockroaches

é ©, Collect pictures of useful and harmful insects. Make a picture
¥ 5 frieze of useful Insects and another picture frieze of harmful
Pochcall nsects.

0 lie. LS

—s

“r= - I


--- Page 158 ---
Fluid
invertebrates
Larva

Pollen

Play the game of useful and harmful,
Who am |? Insects

| help plants to make fruits
| make honey
Who am |?

| bite people
| cause malaria
Who am |?

You eat me
| have a lot of proteins
Who am |?

| cause sleeping sickness
| bite you

Who am |?

Glossary

liquid- like substance.
animals with no backborne.
: @ young Insect which has not yet grown.

fine yellow powder formed in flowers which will cause
the development of fruits.


--- Page 159 ---


--- Page 160 ---
es Unit Jo

Landforms

introduction

The school grounds have objects we can see. When we are going home
we see many more objects. People use some of tr e bigger objects when
they give directions. These objects are called lan iforms. Landforms can
be natural or man-made. Both natural and man- jade landforms make
our environment beautiful. They also make ou lives easy. Trees and
buildings provide us with shelter. We get fruits ani medicine from frees.

(A. Natural landforms

Natural landforms are found in nature. They are not created by man.
They are created by God.

These care mountains, waterfalls, rivers, valleys, balancing rocks and many
more. Balancing rocks are found in Matopos nec | Bulawayo. A waterfall
can be seen aft Victoria Falls. These landforms are visited by people from
other countries. These people are called tourists

rr)

banal
_

Balancing rocks at Matopos Victoria Falls

Mountains are also visited by tourists. In Zimbabw =, the biggest mountain
is called Mount Nyanganii. Its is found in Nyangc


--- Page 161 ---
The children are going to school. They are getting off the bus at Baobab

Bus Stop. What is the name of the school? Where does the name come
from? :

Activity

Discuss how landforms are important to people and animals,

G ee @
€* “ « e iD
1. What are landforrrs?

2. Who created natural landforms?
3. Name two natura landforms.



--- Page 162 ---
4. How are landforms important to people?
5. In the picture, where does the name of the s: 100! come from?

B. Man-made landforms

Man-made landforms are created by humans. E> amples of man-made
landforms are bridges, roads and buildings like sk , scrapers.

Name the following.

Visit a natural landform near your sche ol. What is the name
of the landform?
Draw the landform. Make a model of je landform.

¢

S e e
PAF

Answer these questions.

1. What is the narne of your school?
2. Where did it get its name from?

157


--- Page 163 ---
3. The river nearest tc my home is called
4. Which big building do you know?
5. Have you ever seen a hill? What is the name of the hill?

Landforms
Man-made
Model

Natural
Skyscraper

Glossary

natiiral features of the earth's surface.
made by people.

: representation of something usually smaller than the

original.
created by God,

: tall ouilding.


--- Page 164 ---


--- Page 165 ---
a

eee Ut 29

Sustainable resource managemeni

Introduction

Resources are things that you make use of In your environment. In this unit
we are going to look into how we can manage our local resources for
future generations. Resources are classified into man-made and natural
resources,

Can you think of important resources that we use everyday in our area?

A natural resource Is anything that you can use which comes from nature
and not created by human hand. Natural resources are those things that
are not created by people, for example, sunlight is a natural resource.
No one can say that he or she makes sure that we get sunlight everyday.
No one in our local envionment brings sunlight to us. itis there on its own.
No one controls it.

Some examples of ncotural resources are water, land (soil}, air, wind,
vegetation, minerals ard wildlife.

Water is an important natural resource. Animals and plants need water,
Look at the picture of water below.

——T
160


--- Page 166 ---
————

Land is also a natural resource, Soil is found on |he land. Look at the
picture below, what can you see? What is founci on the land? Discuss
with your friends as a group.

me ue \ 4 se a” Ee
Ae Sey eae * i dae > | ‘ =
dows iin SS SR. se RD

Vegetation includes plants and forests. Look at “1e vegetation on the
picture below. What is its colour?

o #/ eh > = “4 ‘ “4
Mineral ores are important natural resources for « ur country. Example of
minerals found in Zimbabwe are gold and diamo ds,

Wildlife is another important natural resource. Wildlife include wild
animals which are not kept at home. Elephant, gi affe, cheetah, buffalo,
rhinoceros and zebra are examples of wildlife. Look at the wild animals


--- Page 167 ---
below, can you nar-e them? Tell your friend the names of the animals
below.

When some of these resources are used up or finished, we may never
replace them again, ‘or example, minerals, oil and some animals.

We have to be careful when we use natural resources in our locol area.
some of the natural resources take many years to recover. Some trees
in our local area may have taken many years to grow. If we cut them all
they may take a long ‘ime to grow to big trees again, We must remember
to conserve some of !ne natural resources for our children who are going
fo be here after we have long died,

Some of the natural resources which we should remember to use carefully
so that those who corne after us will use them as well are wildlife, water,
land and soil and clean air to breathe.

Activity

Discuss the natural resources in your area and how we use
them everyday.

“a

1. is aN examp ie of a natural resource.
2. Natural resources which cannot be replaced when they are finished
are and


--- Page 168 ---
3. We must natural resources for other ~eople who will come ir
future.
4. One of the natural resources which we she ld conserve is

C&D. Man-made resources

These are things that are there because of human action, They are made
by people. Some natural resources can be chonged by people so ihat
we can use them. Examples of man-made resources are dams, wells
boreholes, crops, buildings and domestic anin als we keep for food ana
other uses at home. The books we use at schoo! are man-made resources
Other examples at school are school furniture, *| vorts uniforms and schoe

buildings.

Look at the man-made resources below. Ide ntify these things in your
groups with the assistance of your teacher.

tli

Can you think of any man-made resources W~ use athome? Your hous
or buildings at your home are man-made resources.

A natural resource like water can be used tom ike aman-made resou's<
like electricity. Soil is a natural resource. it car, be used to make orcs =
to grow crops, which are man-made resoulc &s.


--- Page 169 ---
32.9, alte Activity
ey ee l

I! i s Discuss anc list the man-made resources in your area,

Fr. © © €
© ee « (Exeeicen

a
te

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Write examples of man-made resources at school.
What man-made resources do we have at homes?
Which natural resc urce is used to make electricity?
HOw can we use © natural resource like soil?
Where do books come from?

Investigate ‘he naturaland man-made resources in your area,
How can we use them well,

e¢ = Write the words starting with the last letter going
5 backwards. All the words are about natural
resources.

The first one is water

Fe” EW. HOS, INgilnus Iqreanim daniw


--- Page 170 ---
Conserve
Ore

Vegetation
Wildlife

Glossary

: to keep for a longer time.

‘ rock or earth from which metal o; mineral can be

obtained.

: plants like trees and grass growing in an area.
- qnimals that live in the forest.


--- Page 171 ---
Ps Unit 3()
Waste

Introduction

Waste is any material vhich is thrown away after use, It is unwanted
material. We always s©= unwanted material everywhere we go that Is
thrown away. Waste is found at school, at home, in town and even in
the community. In this !esson we are going to look at sources of waste.

(A&B. Sources of waste )

The different sources c! wastes can be identified by firstly knowing the
types of wastes. We produce q huge amount of wastes in our everyday
life. The litter we throw away after eating causes or produces a lot of
waste. The sources of wuste are household, electronic gadgets, industrial
and plant and animal waste.

sources of waste are classified in the following way
Household waste
It is solid waste that is fo und at home. We see household waste at home

every day in our rubbish bins we place outside. It is made up of rubbish
such as bottles, cans, newspapers, plastics and food left overs.

el.



--- Page 172 ---
These are unwanted or no longer in use tools tf!
dumped by big companies or even at home.
pnones, computers, radios and televisions.

at are thrown away or
-xamples of these are

These are wastes produced by inclustrial activity vw
>, Examples of these wastes ar: «

dumped anywhere

food wastes, ashes, papers and cardboard 6

usually dumped on ihe land or in water.

ich are thrown away or
dangerous chemicals,
xes, These wastes are



--- Page 173 ---
Plant and animal waste

dea Dra
Sh ie
Ne
\

Le , 4 >
Ut ete Te Hie x
Ue PWN ie end

Plant waste Animal waste

Many trees shed leaves each year and most animals such as cattle
produce droppings at ‘east once a day. This combined is plant and
animal waste. This type of waste is often used as manure in gardens and
farms. Examples of plan! wastes are dry leaves and dry twigs that fall of
trees, An example of animal waste is cow dung.

’

4

Activity

Identify sources of waste In your community.

is an example of plant waste.
is an exampie of animal waste.

1. What is waste?

2. Solid waste found ci home is called waste,
3. Identify any four excmples of household waste.

4. Electronic gadgets include and

5.

6.


--- Page 174 ---
(C & D. Disposing of waste

What can be done with waste at home and at school?

Waste can be reused.
Waste can be recycled,
Place waste in a bin.

Burn waste,

We can make a compost.

Littering is when waste is thrown everywhere. It is not allowed to throw
litter everywhere. The other names of waste are litter and rubbish.

Answer these questions.

OoPwn>

Two other names for waste are | and |

Why is some waste dangerous?

The type of waste which can be made into a new product is
What can be done with waste at home?

How do you dispose of waste at school?


--- Page 175 ---
Activity

Identify how people in your area dispose of their electronic
waste. Suggest ways in which the waste can be disposed of
that it does rot become dangerous to the environment.

Glossary

Electronic gadgets: Tools such as machines that have different USES,
for example, a computer or a cell phone,

Household : A place where members of a family live
together under one roof.

Litter ; Waste thrown away by people,

Waste : Waste is any material which is thrown away

after use. It is unwanted material,


--- Page 176 ---
Section A

Choose the correct answer from A, B, C or D.

1. There are seasons in Zimbabwe
A. five B. eight Cc. four D. fourteen
2. Weather instruments are kept in a 7
A. weather station B. windvane
Cc. weather elements D. cloud cover

Study the diagram below and use it to answer question 3.

E
EL.
E
|
|
a
E
E

3. Name the instrument shown above.

A. thermometer B. windvane

Cc. overflow cylinder D. rain-qauge
4. are weather and climate hazarcs.

A. Dry grass B. Flood:

C. Rivers D. Enoucn rain
5. prevents fires from spreading.

A. Dry grass B. Paraffin

Cc. Fire break D. Wind


--- Page 177 ---
6. Decayed'plant anc animal matter is called

A. loam soil B. break down
Cc. roots D. Numus
7. if soil is rubbed in hands, you feel gritty and rough.
A. loam B. clay
Cc. sand D. garden
8. make food in a plant.
A. Roots B, Stems C. Trunk D. Leaves
9. Animals with no backbone are called
A. invertebrates B. vertebrates
Cc. big animals D. people
10. Malaria is spread by
A. locusts B. mosquitoes C. snails D. worms
11. At home we put waste in a ;
A. plate B. dish
C. blanket D. bin
12. are natural landforms.
A. Bridges B. Roads C. Sky scrapers D. Valleys

13. Natural resources which cannot be replaced when they are finished
up are oil and

A. minerals B. furniture Cc. doors D. books
14. An example of a man-made resource is '
A. tree B_ soil Cc. dam D. water
15. Waste can also be called
A. rubbish B. household C. electronic 0D, resource
Section A
Write the correct answer.
16. a) Name an instrurnent used to measure temperature. (1)
b) Write 2 effects of weather and climate hazards. (2)
17. a) Where does soil come from? (1)
b) What causes rocks to break? (1)
i8. a) Where is the extra food for the plant stored? (1)
b) Name the par >f a plant which attracts insects. (1)
19. a) Give 2 examples of invertebrates. (2)
b) State one source of waste. (1)


--- Page 178 ---
es Ui 5)
TEST 1

PART A

Answer the following questions by choosing the correct answers from
these given.

1. Weremove sweat from our bodies by _.
A. heating B. bathing Cc. coughing D. cooking

2. is used to smell.
A. The mouth 8B. The ear Cc. The nose D. The tongue
3. Weuse ____ to brush our teeth.
A. toothpaste 8B. sadza C. drink D. sand
4. _—_ spread diseases.
A. Caitle B. Arms Cc. Gers D. Noses
5. What must you do after visiting the toilet?
A. wash your hands B. wash your feet
C. blow your nose D. clear your plates
6. Which one Is an example of a toiletry?
A. dish B. hoe Cc. pot D. towel
7. Where do you apply lipstick on your body?
A. lips B. nose Cc. ears D. eyes
8. Tne comb is to hair as the toothbrush is to
A. ears B. legs Cc. teetr D. nose
9. Which cosmetic makes you smell good?
A. soap B. eye liner
C. Vaseline petroleum jelly D. perft.me
10. What attracts germs to our bodies?
A. flies B. dirt Cc. smell D. toothpaste

173
| 77. =


--- Page 179 ---
PART B

Answer the following questions in your own words.

1.

Q)
b)
C)

q)
b)
C)
Q)

b)

C)

Name any two body parts
How do you clean the parts you have mentioned?

Why do people bath?

What two activities make people sweat?
How do you rernove sweat from the body?
What two things do you use when bathing?

How many times must you visit the dentist?
Two ways one can protect their teeth are
(i)

()
What do you do when it Is hot?
The protects the body parts.

(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)

(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)


--- Page 180 ---
MEE Ui }>
TEST 2

PART A
1. Before you eat fruits you them.
A. wash B. heat C. boil D. rub
2. Water from open sources must be tc make it safe.
A. brushed B. boiled C. cleaned D. flushed

3. A person with diarrhoea should be given
A. medicine B. toothtuste
C. oral rehydration solution D. pills

4. How many tea spoonfuls of sugor are put in the oral rehydration
solution?

A. five B. six Cc. seven D. eight

5. The biggest naturalsources of waterare_
A. oceans B. seas C. lakes D. rivers

6. What do you need to see germs?
A. glasses B. microscope
Cc. thermometer D. comb

7. A thick liquid produced inside the nose is ccilied
A. saliva B. stool C. mucu:. D. water

8. Playing in dirty water may cause
A. bilharzia B. malaria Cc. chole:a D. typhoid

9. Which animal can spread rabies?
A. cow B. dog Cc. horse D. goat

Be


--- Page 181 ---
10. We should cross flocded tivérs dt a

A.
Cc.

PART B

b)
)

b)

Cc)

d)

b)

dam - FoR, ; 8. bridge

line _ § 2+ 3D. corer

How did people long ‘ago get food?
Which two plar?t seeds give us mealie-meal?
We get irom animals.

Two examples ©: body-building foods are
| (i)
(ii)

Protective foods protect us from

S$adza is an energy giving food and isa
protective food

We get food froin plants and

How do gems cet into our bodies?
We get and from dirty water.
Germs come out of our mouth when we

(2)
(2)
(1)

(1)
(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(2)
(2)
(1)


--- Page 182 ---
ME Ut 34

TEST 3

PARTA

1.

Which two structures are used for storage?
A. house and hut B. grancly and storeroom
C. shed and flat D. grancry and hut

Cattle are kept ina ;
A. sty B. stable Cc. kenne! D. kraal

Plants get energy from the ___
A. sun B. food Cc. coal D. water

Energy makes machines ;
A. stop B. work Cc. grow D. sweat

We use heat energy when
A. playing B. praying C. cooki'g D. reading

We can make water clean by
A. filtration B. boiling C. drinkiig D. smoking

Wood and coal are fuels.
A. liquid B. solid Cc. gas D. petrol

Fuel used in a lamp is
A. diesel B. petrol Cc. parailin D. water

Electricity from moving water is made at _
A. hwange B. Munyati C. Karib- D. Harare


--- Page 183 ---
10. We should cross flooded rivers at a

A. dam B. bridge C. line D. corner
PART B
1. a) State three cevices that use electricity at home, (3)
b) Most of our electricity is made at
(i) , (1)
(ii) (1)
2. a) List two materials which conduct electricity. (2)
6) The following materials cannot conduct or transmit electricity
(i) , (1)
(li) (1)
Cc) A gadget can also be called a (1)

3. a) Magnets attract (i)

@i)_ (2)
6b) What are the ames of the two ends of a magnet? (2)
Cc) Which device has a magnet inside? (1)


--- Page 184 ---
ME Ut 34
TEST 4

PART A

1. is an artefact.
A. Abicycle B. Aclaypot C. Aphone D. A book

2. is needed by both plants and animals.
A. Water B. Tree C. Woo D. Soil

3. What colour is water?

A. \tis red. B. It is colourless.
C. itis blue. D. Itis wiite.
4.  _ is water that flows into rivers and dams.
A. Run-off B. Erosion C. Filtration D. Rising

5. Which one is a source of dirty water?
A. tap B. borehole C. spring D. river

6. Ifrigation water is carried by pipes or .
A. clouds B. air C.. lorry D. canals

7. When water comes naturally to the surfac:: it is called a
A. fiver B. spring Cc. bore ole D. tap

8. is Q water hazard,
A. Drowning B. Swimming C. Bathing D. Watering

9. Which water disaster occurred in Zimbaby e in 2014?

A. Kariba B. Bulawayo C. Matooo D. Tokwe-Mukos:
10. People should build homes on ground.
A. low B. high C. cenial D. medium


--- Page 185 ---
PART B

1. a) What is weathe:? (2)
b) In which season is it
(i) hot and wei ?
(ii) Cold and dry ? (2)
c) Arain gauge is used to measure , (1)
2. a) Fires can destroy and . (2)
b) Wemakea__i to prevent fire from spreading. (1)
C) ands are climate hazards. (2)

3. a) The three main types of soil are:

(i) ;

(il) ,
(ill) (3)
b) Changesin —_s during the day and at night causes rocks to
and forrn soil. (2)


--- Page 186 ---
Ms Unit 36

PART A
1. soil is the best for growing crops.

A. Loam B. Clay Cc. Sand
2. Which part of o plant takes in air?

A. trunk B. branch C. leaf
3. Pollination takes place in the

A. seed B. leaf Cc. stem
4, Animals that have a backbone are called _

A. vertebrates B. invericbrates

Cc. worms D. snakes
5. How many legs do insects have?

A. fourar B. six Cc. eighi
6. Which insect is helpful to people?

A. scorpion B. mosquito C. bee
7.  ——_ sig a natural landform.

A. Abridge B. Abuilding C.Acanal
8 Wemake from coal.

A. food B. slectricity Cc. wate
9. Any material which is thrown away after us= is

A. waste B. good Cc. bad
10. Waste can be in liquid or form.

A. water B. solid Cc. small

TEST 5

D. Fine
D. root

D. flower

D. three
D. housefly
D. Ativer
D. sugar
D. aper

D. good


--- Page 187 ---
PART B
1. a)
b)
2. a)
b)
C)
3. Q)
b)

Two sources of waste are and

) Which three resources are man-made?

Harmful insects include ' and
Which part of a plant holds soil together?
Decayed pliant matter is called

Name two weather elements.
State three things supported by water on earth.

(2)
(3)

(3)
(1)
(1)

(2)
(3)


--- Page 188 ---


