--- Page 1 ---
if\ KAD2 WA ChakuTuuis

Ventures Primary |

~ + —_



--- Page 2 ---
Ventures Primarv English Grade 5 Learner’s Book

© C.J. K. Ngwaru, 2018
© Design College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd, 2018

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
copyright holder cr in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyrizht Act, (Chapter 26:05), 2004.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable for criminal prosecution and
civil claims for damages.

First published 2018
Published by
College Press Publishers (Pvt) Ltd
P. O. Bo»: 3041, Harare, Zimbabwe
Typeset in Century Gothic: 14 pt

Artworks by: W. Mukutirwa, P. Chiroodza, C. Sizara and T. Ngundu
Cover illustration by: Lyton Primary School and Tnash Photography

Photographs by: Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority and

National Musewns and Monuments of Zimbabwe

Printed and Bound by: Impress Investments

ISBN: 978-1-77900-687-5

Acknowledgements

The publishers of this book are grateful to Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority and
National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe for permission to use some of the photographs in this book

The publishers have made every effort to trace the copyright holders. If they

have inadvertently overlooked any, they will be pleased to make the
necessary arrar.gements at the first opportunity.

It is illegal to photocopy any page of this book without written permission from the publishers.

ee



--- Page 3 ---
Unit 1:
Unit 2:

Unit 3:
Unit 4:

Unit 5:
Unit 6:
Unit 7:
Unit 8:

Unit 9:

Unit 10:

Unit 11:
Unit 12:

Unit 13:
Unit 14:

Unit 15:
Unit 16:

Unit 17:
Unit 18:
Unit 19:
Unit 20:

Unit 21:
Unit 22:

Unit 23:
Unit 24:

RUrAl AN UPOAN ZIMDADWE ou... eeeeeecesscesseensecesecesseecseeesecessecsseesseesees l
Sophie and Britto in the ULOAN ALEC vou ccsceesscesccsesececeseccesereseeeees 6
Revision ON GSSESSIVIENl Goo en. eee eet ewe ve _
TNE TOC} ve eeseessccstccesecetscssecescessessecssecesecesseessenssecesecsseecseeeenteesseensecseeenses 1]

The mirror:and the reflection sesesevesesessassesessseesessseescasssssesssssscacssusensevarees 16
fevis jon ond assessment! | eee bth cotew ee cee nee Line ee - %

, Safety tips FOF YOU GN ME ou... ccceceessceesesscccessesssssecseseeseessssseseceesaeesees 24
REVISION GNC ASSESSMENT So cette cee 7 ag
DeSCrIDING DEOPIE ANA THINGS +... cesseecessecessssteceesssccesessseeeesteeeeeseees 36
Comparing TNINGS .....cessscceesssccesssecsseccesseecesssceccessaseseseseeeeersesseecessteeessnees 4]

St GN ASsEssiyiens 4. ones - dectpeabt gee cece 45
Offering an idea ora plan serscossiesesncccensdeiessscbhhssbaeenenenkenestectesncesésspideenes 47
Borrowing and lending sanvsngusseseenseucrsessensusrssseusvertoeeaessrqvnssassnsessarseceniveses 53

Talking c about the FULUTE ceccoccscsesesetssnsessernesesn be veseassnnenaaeeeeeeesseees 59
TAIKING GDOUT TNE POST...........ccesssssseccceeeeesssssnnceccecceeceeesereeseseseeesrenaaeeases 70
Making WISE CIECISIONS.........ccesseescccccesssssnneecceeeeeeeceesssseseesnsnereaeeeesseseeeeees 76
Taking Sart ir ina conversation beceeeeeeeeessennaneeeeeeeeeeceseees “eeeeessesseesesssneceeeeeees 81
The quiz. seveaeecsssauacaesscseeeeecceeeeeeesscnaneeeeseesecsnaneceeceeeeeeeeseeseeceesecsersaaaenreesseesees 86
Looking after our r environment Seseceeeececessesennnececeeeececeeeeeeeseessecenseneeeereesns 93
Boasting secceveseasasseuescusasavsncasavaneacaesnsassusnsarssssssssscsesssseacseseseasasseseesesessesees 106
Giving and following in instructions duseeseeeeessesessesssssesseceeceeeeeceenenaneeseaeeeeess 112
Malaria, the deadly AISCOSEcsccceceseceseeeee Vasiesestedseessessusessesresesenscbvaces 119
Reading WAININGS ANC INSTUCTIONS..........eeeseecssceesenssseeeeecereesssneeereessseeees 124

tunwicion mupd assessmercc 17 Lo .
Local heroes and heroines seosassenececserseesosesseniniansassspedsnsuaneensassusessoess® 13]

End of second fermi asseramem .



--- Page 4 ---
Unit 25:
Unit 26:

Unit 27:
Unit 28:

Unit 29:
Unit 30:
Unit 31:
Unit 32:

Unit 33:
Unit 34:

Unit 35:
Unit 36:

The new teacher CAIN the NEW CIASSOOMM...--s--sserrerserssererssstse ees 142

DITeCtIONS sesessssssssssestssssssneceersvnsssseecnnnnnnnnnnnngnssenenes se eeeeegsgs sO 147
Making polite FEQUCSTS cossssssssssssnseseesennncnessssnnnsnasssnnnnnnen eS 154
Special days cccauevanenseansenscenseeeseeeseneeeeeeeeees * ccuneenacesnsecnnaesssessseneeseeeeeeeee 159
The e global village —ccccueauenaneansssesseceeseesessegeneseQeeyeeeegegeg ete Ott CS 166
‘The world heritage sites: Fart 1 —ccceaunaenensnssssseneseneegegeegegeeeeesgeegeeegegeeeees 180
The world nentage sites: oh Do ccccusueaeansnsnenenesessneseeeeneegseeeet eget eeeeee eee 184
Animal stories a cmmnnntnnnnnnnnnnneennneie sesnensesens 190
Good MONNETS sesssssssessssseesseeeesennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn see ET 196
Staging ‘ a play cc ceeauuaneansesuecsuessessenssessessieesegeeseentgtegee tees gS 202

List of irregular verbs —ccoveveuuuecannesssneesssnssssneeesQueeedsssneguesegegsg gus 200s 00 0 oo ES 219



--- Page 5 ---
Always on the move!

Everydaylsee
Buses, lorries, motor-cars,
Big, medium and small,
With passengers, luggage,
everything

Making endless trips

From the rural areas to

the urban areas.

And from the urban areas
to the rural areas.

ts

ci uroan Zimbabwe

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about the rural and the urban areas of
Zimbabwe and answer the questions that follow.

The people of Zimbabwe live in different areas. Some live in the rural areas, others
in the urban areas. The rural areas are all those farmlands and the districts outside
the cities and towns. The urban areas are all those places in cities and towns,
including growth points. Living either in the rurcil areas or in the urban areas has its
advantages and disadvantages. An advantage is something that is good, and a
disadvantage is something bad or not good.

.

Questions

1. Is your school in the rural or urban areas?
2. In which district is your school?
3. Give reasons why you would prefer to live in a rural area or urban area?



--- Page 6 ---
A family on the move

urban excited bullies - worried marriage
tapped pastures narrow electric

eae eta ce tenn  a amnion teenie te a cote mae -

Since their marriage ten years agc, Mr and Mrs Masuku had lived on their farm in |
the rural areas. Then, they decideci to give up farming and start a new business in |
the city. So they started building a big house in the urban area. They were going j
to move into their new home by the end of the year.-

Their twin children, Sophie and Britto were excited about going to live in the-urban
area. They were excited about going to learn at an urban school. They were ;
excited about going to live in a big house with electric lights and tapped water. :

nea ee enemas mem ee Red oe rmeones

Sophie and Britto also talked about the things they were going to miss. They were
going to miss the hills, the streams and the birds singing in the trees. They were
going to miss their friends, classmates and the teachers they had known all along.
They were going to miss herding cattle and goats in the pastures. They were
going to miss picking wild fruits and dry firewood logs in the forests.

Sometimes Britto and Sophie talked about their hopes in their new home. They
hoped that their new school would not be too far from their new home. They were
afraid of walking long distances ard crossing too many urban roads. Sophie and
Britto were used to crossing the narrow rural roads with very few, slow-moving
cars, not the wide urban roads with many fast-moving cars. They were not going

(BS ET ET Te SPIES be aa Se ee
ila aa i phe



--- Page 7 ---
To ride their bicycles in town for fear of being knocked down or run over by the
fast-moving cars.

Sophie and Britto were also worried about bullies. They had heard frightening
stories about the bullies who ill-treat new-comers at some schools. As the time to
move into their new home drew closer, Sophie and Britto were looking forward
to many things. They were looking forward to cooking on the electric stove and
bathing in the shower. They were looking forward to meeting new friends and
living with friendly neighbours. Sophie and Britto were looking forward to seeing
the bright city lights in the evenings.

Answer the following questions in full, correct sentences:

1. Where had Mr and Mrs Masuku lived since their marriage ten years ago?
2. Mrand Mrs Masuku decided to give up farming. What does that mean?
3. Why did Mr and Mrs Masuku decide to give up farming?

4. If Sophie was eleven years old, how old was Britto?

5. Why were Sophie and Britto afraid of crossing the urban roads?

6. Which word used in this story means the opposite of ‘rural’?

7. Name one thing Sophie and Britto were looking forward to.

8. Why were Sophie and Britto not going to ride their bicycles in town?

Sophie and Britto were twins. Sophie was as old as Britto.

Using the words | in the box, complete the sente inces below correctly ©

leaves lion lightning donkey honey
rainbow aheideld tortoise bees coal

Adding sugar to porridge makes the pomiege as sweet as | hc ( 4
When a snake strikes, it is as quick as
Our new school uniform is as green as jo
Throughout the day, the plantation workers were as busy as

You cannot win any race if you are as slow as a

Although he is over sixty years old now, his hair is still as black as scoc.|
The bottle was full of a liquid that was as colourless as Wwe

To me, the tiger | is just as fierce as a_i .

To me, nothing is ever as beautiful asa 1

0. That boy will not do as he is told, he is as stubborn as a

BP ONE MR ENS



--- Page 8 ---
Using a dictionary, rewrite these sentences using the correct word from the
brackets: ;

1. We all heard her because she cried out (allowed/aloud).

2. Most children love to wear (new/knew) clothes.

3. A pair is made up of (two/too) things.

4, Everyday, | boil some water for tea using an electric (cattle/kettle).

5. The farmer has a large (herd/heard) of cattle.

6. The tall buildings in the cities are also known as (stories/storys).

7. We go out fishing when the (whether/weather) is fine.

8. James won the first (prize/price) in the competition.

Listen carefully and say these two sentences correctly after your teacher.

The boys sat on a set of sofas.
The man ran out to call other men.

Did you notice that the underlined words are pronounced differently?
(a) Say these pairs of words correcily:

bad/bed pan/pen bag/beg . land/lend __ bat/bet pat/pet
and/end cattle/kettle dad/dead — sad/said manrry/merry man/men
sat/set sand/send mat/me~ lag/leg had/head

(b) Your teacher will read out some words for you to write. Listen carefully and write
them down correctly.

Practise good handwriting with the following letters and sentences, writing quickly
at the same time.

Aa Aa Amos, Ananias and Albert are always around.

Bb =Bb Barnabas and Bhobho are Bhebhe’s big brothers.

Cc Ce Charles, Chipo and Chuma go to church by car.

Dd Dd Denford and David divided the dollar between themselves.
Ee Ee Elizabeth and Ellen went to Esigodini yesterday.



--- Page 9 ---
pee

oe eR Tw
ete EA he ae

A complete sentence must have a subject and a verb or action word, €.g.

barks/barked

(i) Make your own short sentences with a subject and a verb with the verbs below

or any other verbs:

ran . cried walked boils shines
blows roars flows voted pray
whispered whistled agreed ate laugh

Some sentences only make sense when they have a subject, a verb and an object,

(ii) Make your own short sentences with a subject, a verb and an object with the
verbs below or any other verbs: )

wrote bought ate cooked play shut hate
thanked locked opened cut lost picked

Imagine that you are Sophie or Britto.in the s“ory A family on the move that you
have read. Write a letter to your friend telling him/her that you are going to move.
The body of your letter should be 80 — 120 words in length. Tell your friend:

* that you are going to move to anew schcol, where, when, why

what you are going to miss

what you are excited about

‘what you are afraid of

what you are worried about

what you are looking forward to.



--- Page 10 ---
i

ie and Britto in the urban areg.

Listen carefully as your teach

% ’
a

Hig

er tells you about something memorable.

When something is memorable, you remember it vividly and YOU do not easily

forget it. In our lives there are memorable days, memorable happenings Or events

_and memorable times or periods. The first day at school may be-a memorable |
day to some of Us. The day when yOU Come very close to an important person

like the president of our country may be q memorable day. .

Tell the class something that is memorable to you. Say it like this:
| remember Vividly the .

It was a memorable to me. . |

The new house cind the first day at school

excitement ceiling wardrobes memorable durawall
nickname enrolled screen whispered Pleasant
button totems furnished spacious

At the end of the year, the Masukyu family said good-bye to their old house in the
rural area. With a lot of excitement, they moved into their new home in the urban
area. Their new home was surrounded by a high durawall. The house was big. It
Was roofed with red tiles. Inside, and hiding the red tiles was a white ceiling.

There was tap water inside the house. The bathroom had a bath tub as well as
a shower cabin. Every room was brightly lit by electric lights. The kitchen was
well-furnished, and there was an electric stove, The house had four spacious |
bedrooms, each with q big bed and wardrobe. The sitting room had huge,
comfortable sofas and a big, flat-screen television set. |



--- Page 11 ---
When the schools.re-opened for the first term, Sophie and Britto were enrolled at
he local school. The school was hardly a kilometre away from their new home.
This really pleased the two children.

The first day at the new school was a memorable one for both Britto and Sophie.
The school head was a big lady, who wore glasses. When she appeared for the
first morning assembly, some_old learners whispered, “Four Eyes,” a nickname
given to her by the learners. This was because she could pick out small things on
«ne learners which the rest of the teachers would not notice, like a missing button
on a shirt, or an untied shoe-lace. The school head introduced herself as Madam

Dube.

i i et ei ti i te ee

ho

Both Britto and Sophie were learning in the same class. Their new teacher, Mr
Nyoni, spent most of the first day talking to each and every new learner. He
asked questions about their likes and dislikes, their favourite subjects and sports,
their birthdays, their families, their home addresses and even their totems. Mr
Nyoni was so friendly that, the new learners felt at home.

After school, Brittocand Sophie walked back home with the other boys and girls.
There were no bullies among the old learners as Sophie and Britto had feared.
Instead, everyone was very pleasant to them, wanting to be their friend, and was
as playful as the learners back in the rural areas.



--- Page 12 ---
Tassie nage ee
Answer the following questions in full.
1. Why could the red roof tiles of the new house not be seen from inside the
house?
2. What really pleased Sophie and Britto about their new school?
3. Who was the new school head? .
4, Why was the school head given the nickname ‘Four Eyes’?
5. Who was the new class teacher for both Sophie and Britto? :
6. What shows you that Sophie and Britto enjoyed their first day at the new school?
7. How did Mr Nyoni make the new learners feel at home?
8. Were there any bullies at the new school?

.
re Tt a ee

The teacher asked the new learners their likes and dislikes. What are likes and
dislikes?
The words likes and dislikes are opposites.

Say the opposites of the following words by adding the prefix dis-.

order connected’ continue

advantage’ obey appear
approve comfort agree respect pleased obedient
honest allow

© Sar nimanaeernereane eenieanrnie o¢—trwnmeemattre ann Marre tae Rene ee sataveennenn eee eee met mee TROT nat eaten esi ery tnrtensne ont dcanae we _

Rewrite these sentences so that they mean the opposite by adding the prefix dis- to
one of the words:

After the heavy rain, the football match was continued.

A big snake appeared in the grass near the chicken run.

When she went out to play with her friends, she left the kitchen in order.

The plumber came and connected the water pipes.

At the last meeting, the chair-person agreed with the rest of the people.

There are some people who say that Ronie is obedient.

The man lived all his adult life in comfort.

His way of greeting visitors is a sign of respect.

PNAORWDN>

In a dialogue two people or two groups of people are talking to one another. Both
people listen and talk. In pairs do a dialogue with one of you as the teacher, and

|



--- Page 13 ---
~Takubaun CHpeutuda

the other as the new learner. Look back at the story to find out what the teacher
was asking each one of the new learners.

eas with oo

(a) In some words, the oo have a short u sound

Say the sentence below correctly after your teacher. The 00 have a short u sound.
| was looking while mother was cooking with a wooden stick.

The oo in the words below have a short u sound. Say the words correcily.

good book cook wood look foot hook football
crook took = wool

(b) In other words the oo have a long u sound.
Say the sentence below correctly after your teacher. The oo have along u sound.

| ate the food with a long speen while sitting on a stool.
The 00 in the words below‘have a long u sound. Say the words correctly.

room school baboon broom tooth food pool
stood soon boots roof foolish spoon understood

moon troop roots wool stool = = afternoon

Copy the letters and sentences.

Ff Ff Fanuel and Francis are from Filabusi.
Gg Gg George and Gregory are going to Gokwe for good.
Hh Hh Henry and his brother Hugo are botn honest and hard-working.
Ti i Israel and India are in Asia.
Jj Jj James and Joyce went on a journey to Japan in June.
L Wide

Imagine that you were Sophie or Britto in the story which you have read. Write a
composition under the heading: My first day at the new school. Your composition
should be 80 — 120 words in length. In the composition, write about:

* the name of your new school and where it is

the school buildings, the gardens, the playgrounds

the school head, the teachers, your class teacher

the learners

whether you think you are going to enjoy learning at this new school and why.



--- Page 14 ---
wets bee cane

estions below in 3 - 4 short sentences:
* Where would you like to live: in the rural areas, or in the urban areas? Why?

First, read this short passage quietly, then read it fluently to the teacher.

People with two homes.

In Zimbabwe today, there are many families that own one home in the urban,
and another in the rural areas. However, most of the time these families live in
the urban home and hardly ever live in the ruralhome. Yet, they will not give
Up those rural homes. They say the rural home is the traditional link with the .
members of the extended family and other relatives who live in the rural area.

The people who are Opposed to the idea of two homes argue that the rural -
home often becomes q white elephant-something that is of no value but costs —
money and time to keep. They say that money and time could be put to better
use if it is soent on improvements on the urban home.

si eae spun Ede
Le ash EY

Laie id st

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences,

1. Why do same People with an urban home keep another home in the rural
areas? .

When is something called a white elephant?

.. ‘They hardly ever live in the rura' home.' What does this mean?

Give any four names of the members of the extended family, for example,
grandmother.

Which word used in the passage means the opposite of ‘urban'?

Why are some families OPPoOsed to the idea of having a'rural home?

Do you live in the rural or in the urban area?

- Where would you like to live when you grow up?

Aw

ON AD

ee eT Te

ig pie 6 ade
Ne (3 ~ ia a . : 3"
S rape Shed apes yi

Your teacher will dictate a paragraph to you while yOu write it quickly and in
good handwriting.



--- Page 15 ---
Say the lines of this poem correctly after your teacher.

In the hot season

At the peak of the hot season,

When the weather is hot indeed,

| take a seat under a big tree by the stream
In the cool shade of its green leaves.

Sometimes | fall asleep and begin to-dream,
In the shade of the green leaves of the big tree.

Learn to recite the poem.
The «== in *=« have a long sound ::

From the poem In the hot season above, say correctly all the words with ee.
Say correctly the words with ee below:

cheese freedom street agree speed wheels bees

Sometimes ea have the same long sound i as in tree. From the poem In the hot
season above, say correctly all the words with ea.

Say correctly the words with ea below:
please clean beans teach weak neat repeat eating reading
Say correctly other words with ea.

A different sound.of ea
Say this sentence correctly:

| saw the head of a dead fish in the water.
In the words head.and dead the ea sound like the short e and the ais silent.



--- Page 16 ---
Say correctly these the words below. The ea in them have the short e sound,

weather bread deaf sweat spread measure feathers leather
threat breast instead pleasure death pleasant heaven already
steady

In a few words, the ea say ei as in eight ;
Say this sentence correctly. The ea in the words have the ej sound.

During the lunch break, | like potatoes with a great steak.

ae

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

rama HT ss

Ce ee NO ee
perennial deciduous anchor throughout moisture = oxygen
domestic — atmosphere 7 significant erosion ____ transported. settlements

The tree is a perennial plant with a thick, long stem or trunk that holds the branches
and the leaves off the ground. Some trees are ever-green. They have leaves that
remain green throughout the year. Other trees are deciduous. They shed or lose
their leaves and grow new ones every year.

Below the ground, the roots of the tree grow and spread widely. The roots anchor
the tree in the soil so that the tree cloes not fall even during the strong winds. The |
roots also collect water or moisture and salts from the soil. These are transported
through the trunk to the leaves. There, the moisture and the salts are mixed with
the sunlight and air from the atmosphere to make food for the whole plant. For |
that reason, the leaves are sometimes referred to as the ‘kitchen’ of the tree or
plant.

Trees play a very significant role in the freee meer reemema se
lives of people and animals. They make:

the countryside look beautiful. Trees also
provide shade and shelter to people
and animals. Tree leaves are food to
domestic animals like cattle, goats and
sheep as well as to wild animals like
elephants, buffaloes and giraffes.

Oxygen, the air that we breathe, is made
in the leaves of the trees. The trees also
help to prevent or reduce soil erosion.
Their roots hold the soil, thus preventing
or reducing the washing away of tre soil
by running water or wind.



--- Page 17 ---
Today, forests are shrinking as trees are cut down for firewood, make way for
farmlands, for roads, or for people's settlerrents. In some cases the trees are
destroyed by veld fires. That is why it is necessary for people to grow trees in order
to replace those that are destroyed.

ot: Beas te | itets

: Using the sentences in the passage on trees, choose the meanings of the words
below:
1. The word ‘ever-green’ means

A. sometimes green B. ‘never green
C. always green D. once green
2. To ‘anchor’ is to LF
A. hold firmly —_B. fall down C. spread widely D. collect water
3. The word ‘significant’ means .
A. useless B. very important C. very small D. beautiful
4, The word ‘shrink’ means . -
A. to become bigger B. to get smaller
C. to feed _D. to lose
5. The word ‘edible’ describes a thing that __
A. can be eaten B. cannot be eaten
C. is not enjoyable D. looks ugly
6. The word opposite in meaning to the word ‘domestic’ is
A. erosion B. beautiful C. necessary D. wild
7. Oxygen is made in the .
A. stem B. roots C. leaves D. fruits
8. This passage shows that trees are .
A. harmful fo people B. useless to people and animals

C. not good for the countryside D. useful to people and animals

; bo write
Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

What is a tree?

What are deciduous trees?

Why are leaves sometimes referred to as the ‘kitchen’ of the tree?

How do trees help people and animals in breathing?

Which part of the tree helps to prevent or reduce soil erosion and how?
Why are the forests shrinking today?

How would the countryside look without trees?

When is a tree said to be evergreen?

CONS AP ON}



--- Page 18 ---
at t

A dog as well as a cat is a domestic animal. (note that we use is, not are)

This is because we are saying: A dog is a domestic animal, as well as a cat is also a
domestic animal. ;

Dogs as well as cats are domestic animals. (now we can use are)

This is because we are saying: Dogs are domestic animals as well as cats are.

As well as means and also.

Rewrite the following sentences with the correct verb from the brackets.

My mother as well as my father (is/are) into farming.

Next Monday as well as Tuesday (is/are) a holiday.

The girls as well as the boys (has/have) lots of work to do.

Maria as well as Sam (sings/sing) in the school choir.

Our parents as well as our teachers (was/were) very pleased with our good
work.

John, Ben and Tod as well as Sophie and Sarah (is/are) in my group.

My brother, as well as my sister (like /likes) sports.

|, as well as my friend (was/were) present.

aARWN>

co MN &

Choose the correct preposition to fill in each blank space.

1. In our country, no one is ___ the law. (on/over/above/in)

2. The big halll is the main road. (beside/below/under/into)

3. The three boys shared the fruits _ themselves. (between/in/with/among)

4. The man fell the tree and broke his arm. (on/along/off/over)

5. The main road to the city runs _ the farms. (through/at/into/along)

6. During the holidays, | look __ my father’s cattle. (towards/up/after/on)

7. \|look forward seeing you next week. (at/to/for/in)

8. The sad news quickly spread __ the whole district. (on/throughout/over/
Up)

9. The robber was sentenced ______ three years imprisonment. (for/in/onto/to)

10. Mother sharecdtthe cake ___ me and my sister. (among/between/to/for)

Imagine that you are going to a meeting where some people are saying we must
grow trees and others are saying growing trees is a waste of time. Prepare and



--- Page 19 ---
write a short speech to persuade all the people to agree to grow trees. Read your
snort speech to the class.

A paragraph is a text made up ofa topic sentence and a few supporting sentences.
The topic sentence gives the main idea. The supporting sentences say more about
the main idea. Look at this paragraph that begins with a topic sentence and has
five supporting sentences:

Trees

Trees are very important to people, animals and the environment. They provide
shade and fruits to people. They are a source of timber for furniture and buildings.
Trees also provide shelter to birds and animals. Tree leaves, bark and roots are
food to many animals. Without trees, the environment would not look as beautiful
as it does with trees.

Write a composition based on the picture.
Your composition should be between
80-100 words. Each paragraph should
have a topic sentence and supporting
sentences. In the composition say:

¢ who that boy is (give him a name)

¢ what he was doing

« when

* where

* why he was doing that

* what happened next

* how it happened

° how it ended.



--- Page 20 ---
sedrieag tu? .

Listen carefully and say the lines of this poem correctly after your teacher.

The mirror

| look in the mirror,

And see myself.

You too can see yourself, . Sa ae
If you look in the mirror. . Soares : savy |
Anyone can see oneself. . ye |
Mother can see herself. 3 |
Father can see himself. MVS! : Gnas !
Even the dog can see itself. EPS Sp rh
All of you can see yourselves. a6 AB
The children can see themselves. E ~My
All of us can see ourselves, y VL \Qe
lf we look in the mirror. fA S24 »}

Choose the correct pronoun to fill in the blank spaces.

myself himself ourselves: itself yourself themselves herself
Everyday | wash in warm water.

If a snake bites it dies.

You are now a grown-up and rnust look after .

All of us are now-grown-ups and must look after__—

Father hurt with a razor blade.
All animals will fight to protect LN :
We all like to speak good of __ all the time. -
The teacher ordered the learners to clean the classroom

CONAARWN >

s LL Te NT cee



--- Page 21 ---
Read and enjoy this story, then answer the questions that follow.

The greedy rat

annoyed belly "prey predator

Mrs Baloyi was a hard-working woman. She spent the day working hard for her
family. At the end of the day she returned home hoping to get a good sleep
which she did not always get. A greedy rat lived in Mrs Baloyi's house. At night
this greedy rat made a lot of noise, searching for food. The noise made by the
rat annoyed Mrs Baloyi as it kept her awake when she wanted to sleep and rest.

A neighbour, Mrs Gundani advised Mrs.Baloyi to keep a cat in her house. This was
a good idea to which Mrs Baloyi readily agreed. Therefore, Mrs Baloyi bought a
big cat and kept it in her house. At night the ccit would run after the rat but would
not catch it. There was now more noise in the house. This made Mrs Baloyi even
more cross.

One evening Mrs Baloyi came home with a basket full of shelled peanuts. She
was going to make rich, home-made peanut butter. The rat saw the basket full of
peanuts and wanted to eat the peanuts. However, the basket was closed with a
tight lid and the rat could not get into it. That night, the rat made a small hole in
the basket. Then he squeezed through the small hole and reached the peanuts.
He ate a lot of the peanuts. Then he felt full and was very happy.

Before dawn, the rat wanted to get
out of the basket. He tried to come
out through the small hole that he
had made earlier but could not. His
belly. was so full that it was now too
large to squeeze through the small
hole. He decided to enlarge the
hole so that he could get out of the
basket.

While trying to enlarge the hole with
its sharp teeth, the rat made a lot of
noise. The cat heard where the noise
was coming from.and knew where
its prey was. Quietly, the cat went to
the basket and waited for its prey to



--- Page 22 ---
come out. Meanwhile, the rat was busy enlarging the hole, not knowing that its
predator, the cat was waiting to catch and eat him. When finally the rat came
out of the basket, the cat easily killed it. From that day, Mrs Baloyi was able to
enjoy her sleep in her house.

Choose the correct answer.

1.

Why was Mrs Baloyi not getting enough sleep at night in her house?
A. She was a hardworking woman.

B. The cat kept her awake.

C. Arat was making a lot of noise.

D. She wanted to make peanut butter.

What was the good idea to which Mrs Baloyi readily agreed?

A. Toreturn home at the end of the day.

B. To keep a cat in her house.

C. To bring home a basket full of peanuts.

D. To make peanut butter.

What made Mrs Baloyi even more cross?

A. The hole in the basket made by the rat.

B. The noise of the cat chasing the rat.

C. The cat failing to catch the rat.

D. Mrs Gundani's advice to her.

Why did Mrs Baloyi bring the basket full of peanuts into her house?
A. To make peanut butter.

B. To feed her caf.

C. To give to Mrs Gundani.

D. In order to catch the rat.

Why could the rat not come out of the basket at first?

A. The basket had a tight lid.

B. It wanted to eat more peanuts.

C. There was too much noise outside.

D. Its belly had become too big.

Which of these is referred to as the ‘prey’ in the story?

A. the peanuts - B. the cat

C. the basket D. the rat

An animal that hunts and kills another animal for food is called a
A. predator 8B. pet C. prey D. hunter



--- Page 23 ---
ocabulary

Using the story: The greedy rat, select the answers to the following questions:
1. A person who is hardworking is someone who is ;
A. very lazy
B. not working hard at all
C, not getting enough sleep at night
D. diligent and committed when working
2. Something that annoys you
A. makes you feel happy
B. makes you feel angry
C. gives you hope
D. pleases you
3. There was more noise in the house and this made Mrs Baloyi even more cross.
Becoming more cross means

A. getting more angry B. being very agreeable
C. getting less sleep D. walking across
4. Which word is opposite in meaning to the word asleep?
A. Awake B. Annoyed C. Rest D. Enjoy
5. Which word in the story means getting through a tiny space?
A. returned  B. tried C. squeezed D. reached

6. To enlarge is to .
A. make something smaller B. create something new
C. make something bigger D. make a lot of noise

7. The word ‘searching’ in the story means __

A. stealing food B. trying g to find something
C. starting something new D. falling asleep
8. Someone who lives next door to you is your
A. neighbour B. friend
C. relative D. comrade

etusing: Words
The words in pairs below are often confused when people use them.

piece/peace saw/sew meat/meet heels/heals
match/march where/were | damp/dump crush/crash



--- Page 24 ---
Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

During a war, there is no (piece/peace),.

Mother will (saw/sew) a new shirt for me.

| enjoy eating roasted (meat/meet).

The wound on her arm took a long time to (heel/heal).

| always enjoy watching a good football (match/march).

Could you please show me (where/were) Zimbabwe is on the map?
| cleaned my face with q (dump/damp ) piece of cloth.

There was a car (crush/crash) at the intersection.

PNAOKR WH —

Look at the three short sentences in the boxes.

Everyday/Every week/Now Yesterday/Last week In the unspecified past
| eat some fruits. | ate some fruits. | have eaten some fruits.

Now make your own three short sentences with each of these verbs in the same

way:

see drink go do write hide take dig give grow speak sing

Rewrite these sentences with the right form of the verbs in brackets.

1. The baby has (Arink/drank/drunk) the milk that was (give/gave/given) to him.

2. lhave (write/wrote/written) the letter and (take/took/taken) it to the post office.

3. Since you (give/gave/given) Us the piece of land, we have (grow/grew/grown)

many trees there.

A thief has (steal/stole/stolen) my bicycle and (hide/hid/hidden) itin the bushes.

| have (see/saw/seen) the homework and! have (do/did/done) it already.

He has (g0/went/gone) to see the tall grass that has (grow/grew/grown) in the

garden.

7. She has (speak/spoke/spoken) all the words they have (sing/ sang/sung) in the
new song. .

8. Ihave (hide/hid/hidden) the bottle in the hole that you have (dig/dug/dug).

4.
5.
6.

° We walked through a valley. (5 words)

Note that the summarized sentence means exactly the same as the long sentence.
Using the nouns in the box, summarize the sentences on the next page by replacing
he underlined phrases With the words in the box above. You may use the dictionary
for the meanings of the words in the box.



--- Page 25 ---
Se

nti §

tributaries ‘weather stationery -
- heritage century drought

fortnight traffic

My uncle lived for a period of one hun red years.

That shop sells pens, rulers, exercise books cond other writing materials.

It is not fair to jump the long line of people waiting to do something.

We have had this cold weather for a period of two weeks.

Lake Mutirikwi was built for providing water in order to make the crops in t

plantations grow.

Many animals died during the period when there was very little or no rainfall.

Every morning there is a lot of buses, mofor-cars, cyclists and pedestrians going

into town.

8. Except the Zambezi, the Limpopo and the Sabi, all the other rivers in Zimbabwe
are rivers that flow into other rivers. .

9. The people wear different clothes according to the conditions that are there in
ihe atmosphere, such as whether it is hot or cold, sunny or wet.

10. We are very proud of our arts, the buildings, the traditions and the beliefs that

our society considers to be important parts of our history and culture.

ARWN>

MNO

Practise good handwriting with the following letters and sentences, writing quickly
at the same time. :

Kk Kk Kadoma and Kwekwe are seventy kilometres apart.

Ll Ll Lilian lives in Lilongwe; the capital city of Malawi.

Mm Mm Mary missed the Monday morning meeting in Mutare. —
Nn Nn Norman Nhando was born on the nineth of November.
Oo Oo  Owethu was born on the second of October.

Write a composition about an interesting animal story that you have heard or read
about. You can also find many animal stories on the internet. Give your story a
good heading. Your composition should be 80 - 120 words in length. You may use
one of the following ds the beginning of your composition.

* Once upon a time, the ; ,

¢ Along, long time ago the
e Many centuries ago .
* More than a thousand years ago the .



--- Page 26 ---
Listen carefully as the teacher reads this short Story:
Bhuka and the other Villagers

During the warm summer season, the Villagers in one rural village were busy :

collecting firewood iN preparation for the Gpproaching cold winter season.

One villager, however, did not bother to collect the firewood, His name was .

Bhuka. When the rest of the villagers went out to collect firewood, Bhuka would
go out fishing or swimming.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
. Why were the Villagers collecting firewood?

. What was Bhuka doing when the other villagers were busy Collecting firewood? -

. Which word tells us that the winter that came was very cold?

. Why was nobody sorry for Bhukal when he was shivering from the cold weather? ;

1
2
3
4
5. What does this story teach us?
6. Which season between summer and winter do you prefer?
7. How do People around your home prepare for winter?
8. Do

re

you th

ea

° the firewood with schoolwork
* the seasons of the’year with the school terms
* the cold winter season with the examinations.

Po RY :

Read with clarity one Paragraph from the story: Bhuka and the other villagers to
the teacher. _

ink it is right for People to cut down trees for firewood? Give areason,. -


--- Page 27 ---
‘ Summary practice

‘Using the nouns in the box, summarize the sentences below by replacing the
_underlined phrases with the words in the box:

- population ——~_— twins right racism
holidays ancestors Polygamy training

decade
spectators

oa vor nnee-emremaniraten peveew eran mcentstn ne + aenermerern-rerer

1. These trees have been giving us lots of fruits for a period of ten years.
2. Our people whe lived a long, long time ago and are related to us were food

collectors; not farmers. |
3. Tobe skilled, one has to go through the process of learning a particular job or

activity.
4. Batsirai and Busisiwe are two children born at the same ti
mother.

5. Wise learners read their books even during the days and weeks when the
schools are closed.

6. The wa ehavi r thinking that treats some people unfairly because of
their race must be stopped.

7. The people watching a football match enjoyed the match.

8. The councils must see to it that there is enough water for the people who live in

a particular area.

9. Did you know that education is a thing that you are morally and legally allowed
to have? .

10. The custom of having more than one wife at the same time is very costly.



--- Page 28 ---
>)

Listen carefully as the teacher tells you some safety tips for self-protection.

a) Keep on you a well-written card with these personal details: full names, home
address and the contact numbers of your parents or guardian. You can design
and write your own personal ccrd that looks like this:

Names: Thomas Moyo
Home address: 38 Mopane St Rhodene, Masvingo
Parents’ contact numbers: 077 840 3214/071 233 3741

6) On your way to and from schocl:

* walk in groups

* use roads or paths used by other people

* never cross flooded streams and rivers

* donot play or run with sharp objects like knives or pencils in your pocket
* do not allow people to touch your body

* donot climb fences or tall trees

* donot play or loiter on the roacis .

* do not get on or off a motor-car or bus while it is still moving.

Using Gescuss so thor opin rerio say why you should do or not do each one of
the safety tips above.

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.
Safety for pedestrians and cyclists
motorists cyclists distractions mobile briskly behaviour
traffic collision. "extreme visible trollies immediately

Now and again, we hear of motorists, cyclists and_pedestrians getting seriously
injured or killed in traffic or road accidents. The major cause of accidents for
pedestrians is distracted walking. Distracted walking is the behaviour of crossing
or walking on the road while the person is busy doing something else.

Pedestrians should not make or taxe calls on their mobile phones while walking
on or crossing the road. Neither should pedestrians listen to music, read books or



--- Page 29 ---
newspapers, eat or drink while walking on, or crossing the road. Wearing head-
phones while crossing or walking on the road is dangerous practice.

Cyclists should ride their bicycles on the extreme left side of the road. Pedestrians
should walk on the extreme right side of the road, facing on-coming traffic.
Pedestrians include people pushing trollies, push-carts or wheel barrows.

lf you are a pedestrian or a cyclist, you should do four things before crossing or
joining a road. First, check traffic coming on ine road from your right. Secondly,
check traffic coming on the road from your left. Thirdly, check again the traffic
coming on the road from your right. Finally, cross the road, only if it is safe to do

so. Walk briskly and directly, but do not run ac’oss the road.

Cyclists and pedestrians should give way to the traffic coming towards them. It is
dangerous to stand on, or too close to the road. Many people are hit by motor-
vehicles when they rush to cross the road immediately after a vehicle has passed
by.

’ Pedestrians should use the zebra-marked pedestrian crossing points whenever

they are there. Even then, the pedestrians shiould still follow the four checking
steps before crossing the road.

When walking or cycling on the road aft night, pedestrians and cyclists should put
on bright clothes or carry flash lights. This is so that they are easily visible to the
motorists. Finally, if you are a passenger in a motor-car or bus, sit on the seat and
fasten the seat belts. The seat belts will save you from being thrown out should the
car overturn or is involved in a head-on collision.

<a



--- Page 30 ---
EE ee RMR EE be oe

| Answer the questions below.

1. What do you call someone travelling by motor-car?

| 2. A cyclist is someone travelling by .

3. What do you call the behaviour of crossing or walking on the road while the
person is busy doing something else?

4. On which side of the road should cyclists ride their bicycles?

9. Pedestrians move on the side of the road.

6. What should pedestrians or cyclists wear when they use the road at night?

7

8

Road accidents just happen. They are not caused by people. True or false?
Why should passengers wear seat belts? ,

Read the sentences below:
* You will not win the race if you do not run fast.
* — You will do well in the examination if you work hard.

Complete the following sentences with suitable endings.
1. The vegetables will wilt if .

2. The cattle will get out of the kraal at night if

3. The learners will do well in their studies if

4. The team will not win the game if

5. We will have a good harvest if __

6. The: children will get a cold if.____

7. The teacher will not be happy if _

8. We will not cross the river if

“sg should

=

(i) From the passage: Safety for pedestrians and cyclists, say the things that
pedestrians and cyclists should do or should not do.
(ii) Using should or should not write your own sentences using these phrases:
1. when the dogs bark at you 2. before handling food
3. ona very hot day 4. when there is lightning and thunder
5. when going to school or returning home from school



--- Page 31 ---
Read. again the second paragraph of the passage ictety for pecesiians

Do you see how the word while is used? While is used to say one action is happening
at the same time as another different action, for example:

| was fast asleep while my mother was cooking. OR
While mother was cooking, | was fast asleep.

Write four sentences of your own with the word v.itii¢ in each one of the sentences.

e ang sound of oa as in tne word :oG™

(i) Say the lines of this poem correctly after your teacher.
The oa have along sound and the a is silent.

The. goats on the road

| saw a dozen goats roaming

On the broad road past the oats field.
Then on the same broad road .
A lorry with a load of coal approached. 7
The lorry hit the roaming goats with a bang,
And its load of coal scattered

All over the broad road

On which the goats had been roaming.

(ii) Say the words below.
The oa in therm has the same long sound as in the word road.

soap loaf coast bocist coat goal
groan approach moan loaves boat



--- Page 32 ---
First, seé how the fourth paragraph in the story: Safety for pedestrians and cyclists
is written. Your teacher will read out that one paragraph while you write it neatly
and quickly.

The picture below tells a story. Write a composition in which you tell the story shown
in the picture. Your composition should be 80 — 120 words in length.

Here are some ideas to help you:
* who the boy in the picture is

* where he was going

* what he was doing, when, where }“
* what he did not do right .
* what he should have done



--- Page 33 ---
tO A aneereees oa Viena ae
4 pi Se a Rae A aeee PS eS ca
Raat eG RUE aacaigy ,

English Paper 1
Time: | hour 30 minutes (Total marks: 40)

Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

The heavy rains that fell during the rainy season had little impact on Lake

- Mutirikwi, also known as Lake Kyle. The huge lake remained af thirty-nine percent
of its full capacity, with slightly above half a million cubic metres of water. When
full, Lake Mutirikwi holds one million, four hundred cubic metres of water.

The villagers who live around the lake said they were worried by the low water
levels. They had hoped that the continuous rains were going to fill the big man-
made lake but got disappointed when that did not happen. Although the city
of Masvingo also relies on Lake Mutirikwi as its only source of water, this lake was
primarily built to store water for irrigation on the sugar-cane plantations in the
lowveld. Other dams like Manjirenji and the Manyuchi have also been built to
store additional water for irrigation for the same sugar-cane plantations in the
lowveld.

Before the more recent completion of the Tokwe-Mukosi Lake, Lake Mutirikwi
was Zimbabwe's second largest dam after Lake Kariba. Now. the Tokwe-
Mukosi Lake has replaced Lake Mutirikwi as the country's second largest dam.

1. The other name for Lake Mutirikwi is .

A. Lake Kyle B. Manyuchi Da
— C. Manjirenji Dam D. the Tokwe-Mukosi Lake
2. We say a dam is man-made when .

A. it is not full B. villagers live around it

C. it was built by men D. it was not built by men
3. The heavy rains that fell continuously in that season

A. filled the dam — B. did not fill the dam

C. disappointed the villagers D. worriecl the villagers
4. What was the main reason for building Lake Mutirikwi?
A. Fishing. B. To store water for irrigation.
| C. To supply water to Masvingo.D. To supply water to the villagers.



--- Page 34 ---
= rete hy

* —.

ee

eee ne

Se ta

A. third largest dam B. second largest dam
C. largest dam D. newest dam

6. What disappointed the villagers?
A. The heavy rains.
B. That the lake did not fill up.
C. Too many dams in the area,
D. The sugar-cane plantations.
7. If Lake Mutirikwi dried up completely, .
A. there would be no water fos irrigation on the sugar-plantations
B. _ the villagers who live around the lake would have nowhere to go
C. there would be no water for the city of Masvingo
D. nobody would be worried cibout that
8. Which of these statements is true?
A. Tokwe-Mukosi was built before Lake Mutirikwi.
B. Lake Mutirikwi used to be bigger than Lake Kariba.
C. Tokwe-Mukosi Lake is now Zimbabwe's largest dam.
D. Lake Mutirikwi was built before Tokwe-Mukosi.

Choose the correct preposition to {ill in the blank space.
10. Many people are afraid wild animals.

A. with B. to ~ C. by D. of
11. We are now looking forward __ the warm weather.
A. at B. on C. to D. for
12. Motorists are the people travelling car.
A. by B. with C. in D. on
13. The learners were worried getting low marks in the examination.
A. for B. by C. about D. with

Choose one word in which the co has a different sound.
14, A. cook B. football C. moonlight D. wood

Choose one word in which the ea has a different sound.
15. A. sweat B. repeat — C. feathers D. weather

Choose one word in which the u has a different sound.
16. A. humble — BF ambush C. tunnel D. customers

Choose the correct word to fill in the blank space.
17. Mother will a new dress for my sister.

A. SO B. saw C. sow 'D. sew
18. Our new school is cl lady.

A. herd B. head C. heard D. had



--- Page 35 ---
Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Last month my husband, the children and | took a holiday trip to the Zambezi
Valley in the northern shores of Lake Kariba which is rarely visited by tourists.
On the way, as we drove through forests, we saw elephants, zebra, kudu, and
herds of impala. It was during day time but we did not see any lions as we would
have expected. The king of the jungle, as we were told later, chooses to sleep
~ in the shade during the day and patrol his kingdom around dusk or sunset. That
is when lions catch their prey when the animals come to drink water.

About five hundred kilometres from the crowded city where we had come

from, we were now driving up a hill, knowing that the lake was on the other
_ side. We were looking forward to it. We had been in the car for a long time.
- twas hot and we needed a break. Up the hill we went and we saw the most
' wonderful view of a lush green valley and the deep blue of the lake shining
under the.red rays of the setting sun in the distant horizon.

We stopped at the summit of the hill and the children quickly jumped out of the
car. They stood looking down. They must have figured that they had reached
the top of the world as they started chanting, “We are on top of the world! We
are on top of the world!”

19.Who is telling the story in the passage above?
A. One of the children. B. The husoand.
C. The wife. D. We do not know.
20.Where were they going? :
A. To the forests to see wild animals.
B. To the city.
C. To the town of Kariba.
D. To the Kariba dam in the north.
21.A place that is rarely visited by people is one that is
A. visited by few people
B. never visited by people
C. visited by too many people
D. visited during daytime only
22. Which statement is true?
A. They did not like to see lions.
B. They saw lions asleep in the shade.
C. They later saw lions at dusk
D. They saw no lions.
23.Thé word ‘summit’ in the story means

A. the valley Below ’'B. the side of the hil
C. the top of the hill D. the end
24, are people who travel on holiclay to see places.

A. Children B. Tourists C. Rural D. Rays



--- Page 36 ---
25.Who or what in this story is referred to as the ‘king of the jungle’?
A. The lion. B. The elephant. C. The husband. D. The lake.
26.When is dusk?
A. At mid-day. B. During daytime. C. Atsunrise. _ D. At sunset.

Choose the verb in the right tense to complete the sentence.
27. | have never a hippo.

A. see B. saw C. seen D. seeing
28. The herd boy has the cattle into the kraal.

A. driven B. driving C. drives D. drove
29. One of the boys in my group has my book.

A. takes B. taken C. taking. D. took
30. | do not go to bed before | have my homework.

A. doing B. does C. done D. did

Choose the correct word to fill in the blank space.
31. A person travelling on foot is called a

A. passenger B. motorist C. cyclist D. pedestrian
32. Some people live in the rural areas, while others live in the areas.
A. districts B. families C. villages D. urban
33. Some trees are evergreen, while others are .
A. poisonous B. deciduous: C. beautiful D. useful
34. A river that flows throughout the year is said to be .
A. perennial B. seasonal C. dangerous D. wonderful

Choose the correct pronoun for the sentence.
35. My mother and father own a tuck-shop which they run

A. himself B. herself C. itself D. themselves
36. | told my sister that one must:do one’s homework .
A. herself B. oneself C. myself D. ourselves

Choose the correct word to complete the sentence correctly.
37. My mother as well as my father ____ present at the meeting.

A. was B. are C. were D. have been
38. | met her on the road .| was taking a walk.
A. if B. then C. while D. that

Choose the correct meaning of the underlined phrase.
39. When | went out fishing, | came across other fishermen.

A. metby chance BB. visited C. was disturbed by _D. did not like
40. My parents were cross with me for losing my jacket at’school.
A. sorry for B. angry with C. pleased with D. asking



--- Page 37 ---
‘English Paper 2
Time: 1 hour 45 minutes

“SECTION A ~ COMPOSITION (20 MARKS)
_ You are advised to spend 1 hour on this section.

. Answer either 1(a) or 1(b); butnot both.

- 1(a)

: Your class got a new teacher in-the middle of the year. Write a letter to a friend
- at another school telling him or her about the new teacher. Your letter should
‘ be 80 - 120 words in length. In your letter, write:

_ © why’you got a new teacher in the middle of the year

where he or she came from

the new teachers: sex, name, age, appearance

what some learners said or thought about the new teacher at the beginning
what the learners are saying now about the new teacher

in what ways is the new teacher different from the former teacher

whether you like the new teacher or not, and why.

1(b)
Imagine that your family has moved into a new home in a new area. In 80
~ 120 words, write a composition under the heading Our new house. In the
composition, write:
* when you got to know that you were going to move into a new house
* what excited you, what worried you, what you looked forward to
* when you moved into the new house, where the new house is, its surroundings,
its appearances, what you like or dislike in or about the new house
¢ the neighbours, their families, their children, why you like or dislike them.

SECTION B | ‘COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15 MARKS)
You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.

(i) Comprehension (10 marks)

Read the passage and answer the questions that follow.

e

te



--- Page 38 ---
Mm perenne ecb ese meets merit: “emt menemnenet neces ae ate—iec remnant areata tn pat mantener itt He ope a

Baboons

Baboons are a common sight in many parts of Zimbabwe. They are a type of
monkey that is found nowhere else in the world except in Africa and Arabia.
They survive in different habitats that include forests, open woodlands, semi-_'

arid areas as well as on mountains and hills.

Baboons are social animals that is, they live in groups, called troops. Inatroop .
there can be seven to eight males and twice as many females with their off- |

spring. The male and female baboons look alike except that unlike the:males,

the females do not have long hair around their necks. The male baboons are. ;

also larger than the females.

Baboons have long, dog-like mouths called muzzles with strong jaws and sharp |
teeth or canines. Baboons are territorial animals: they will fight to defend their .
territory. Their main predators are lions, leopards, wild dogs, hyenas, eagles, |

crocodiles and pythons. Predators are animals that hunt, kill and eat other
animals.

Unlike hippos and crocodiles that live in the water, baboons are terrestrial —

animals. They live entirely on the land. Baboons are opportunistic feeders. This
means they eat whatever is there at the moment. A troop of baboons can

ruin the entire crop on a farm. That is why farmers sometimes call the baboons |

pests, just like insects. Baboons also eat fruits, tree bark, roots, insects, lizards,
snakes, birds, and small mammals like mice, squirrels and rabbits.

Baboons use different sounds for communication. They are able to grunt,

scream or bark. Besides these vacal sounds, baboons can yawn, smack their |

lips or shrug their shoulders.

Questions

1. Where in the world are baboons found?

2. What shows that baboons are social animals?

3. How do the female and male baboons differ?

4. When is an animal called a predator?

5S. Why are baboons called opportunistic feeders?

6. What are territorial animals?

7. What is the name given to the long, dog-like mouth of a baboon?
8. Isahippo ora crocodile q terrestrial animal? Why?

9. Why do farmers sometimes call baboons pests?
]

0. What does it mean to say that baboons are a common sight in Zimbabwe?



--- Page 39 ---
(ii) Summary (5 marks) _

The paragraph below has 87 words altogether. First, read the paragraph carefully.
Then, using nouns or names to replace some of the phrases, summarize the
paragraph in 25 — 30 words.

A visit

During the days when the schools were closed, my father’s sister and | visited
a father, a mother and their two children who were born at the same time by
the same mother. The father, mother and the two children own a large area of
land where crops are grown on a large scale. The father, mother and their two
children also own a large area of land where fruit trees are grown. We spent a

period of two weeks with the mother, the father and the two children.

~ TA Kun2W A Cuxutud &



--- Page 40 ---
The mountains of Zimbabwe

In our beloved Zimbabwe, :
There are numerous mountains and hills,
Of various shapes and sizes. i
Some are monotonous to the eye.
Others are mysterious and famous.
In the mountains,
Are indigenous trees,
Poisonous plants
Dangerous animals.

1. Whenis a place said to be:

(a) monotonous (b) mysterious (c) religious (ca) famous

(e) gorgeous (f) populous (g) mountainous (h) prosperous?
2. When is something or when are things said to be:

(a) poisonous (6b) numerous (c) monotonous (d) indigenous?

3. What are deciduous trees?
eg
Read this story and answer the questions that follow.
° Elina goes ona trip

humorous numerous monotonous industrious religious. —_ granite
fables mysterious foot-print prestigious delicious populous

Elina Mlambo grew up in the small town of Chipinge in Manicaland Province.
Chipinge is smaller than Mutare which is the largest city in the province. Elina is
the oldest in a family of five. She is a student at Gaza High School, the school
nearest to her home. She is now in Form Four.



--- Page 41 ---
U

Elina is a humorous girl. She tells many funny jokes and interesting stories. Elina is
also.a religious girl. She teaches her brothers and sisters to pray before meals and
before going to bed. At home, Elina is also very industrious. She helps her mother
to cook. She washes the pots and plates and she also cleans the house. Elina
does many different tasks. She says doing one: task over and over is monotonous
and boring.

Last month, Elina and the other students from Gaza High School returned from an

_ unforgettable school trip to Harare. Elina told her brothers and sisters about the

numerous places they visited in Harare.

One of the places they visited is a famous place known in the local Shona
language as Domboramwari, which means ‘the Rock of God'. Domboramwani is
a small granite rock in Epworth, about twelve kilometres south-east of the city. This
place has interesting fables, or traditional animal stories that teach moral lessons.

~ Elina and the other students went up Domboramwari. From the summit they could

see Ruwa, Msasa, and Chitungwiza which are: some of the suburbs of Harare.

At Domboramwari, they saw the mysterious footprint that is cast in the hard,
granite rock. The students all stood looking at the mysterious human foot-print.
They also saw the mysterious natural carving that has the 2 shape of our country,
Zimbabwe. This again is also cast in the —

hard granite rock of Domboramwari.
Up to this day, no-one has been able
to explain the mystery of the foot-print
and of the map of Zimbabwe cast in the
rock at Domboramwari.

Later, all the students had a delicious
lunch at the prestigious Sheraton Hotel.
Harare is a populous city, so there were
many people also having lunch at the
Sheraton.

Answer these questions in full sentences.

In which province is Chipinge?

How many children are in Elina's family?

What shows that Elina is a humorous girl?

What does Eling think about doing the same task over and over again?
Where did Elina and the other students go for a trip?

How many places did Elina and the other students visit in Harare?

What are fables?

Which word used in the passage shows that there are a lot of people in Harare?

CONAARWN>



--- Page 42 ---
(a) Look at this sentence:
Manicaland is a mountainous province.

We have added -ous to the word mountain to form the adjective mountainous.
In the same way, form and say the adjectives from these words:

danger “Courage poison prosper peril thunder murder scandal joy

Adjectives can be formed from nouns or names. Look at these two examples:
* Mrs Zuva is a very courageous woman. "

(the adjective courageous is formed from the noun courage)

° Maize is a seasonal crop.

(the adjective seasonal is formed from the noun season)

Rewrite ‘the following sentences correcily with the adjective formed from the noun
in the brackets.

1. Anna grew up ina (religion) farnily.

2. Aguitaris a (music) instrument.

3. | took the (origin) copy of my birth certificate to school.

4. In his days, the musician Michael Jackson Was a very (fame) person.
5. People should not build houses on (agriculture) land.

6. Bungee jumping is a (danger) sport.

7. Measles are a very (infect) disease.

8. The businessman makes (occasion) trips to the city

fans nay he,
Mees oy ey et ges

Some adjectives combine with verbs to form compound adjectives that are written
with a hyphen (-) in between, e.g. My brother is a high-ranking police Officer.

Rewrite the following sentences correctly with ahyphenin the underlined compound
adjectives:

| have long lastin memories of my sister's wedding.

The children have been warnecl not to walk acrdss the fast flowing river,

There was a slow Moving tractor in front of the bus.

We have many sweet smelling flowers in our garden.

The heavy rains left some low lying areas flooded.

Mathematics is for everyone and not just for the Quick thinking learners.

SaARWN>



--- Page 43 ---
7. Elizabeth is a very good looking girl.

8. All the hard working learners will do well in the examination.
9. Our president is a tough talking person.

10. Some people like to wear tight fitting clothes.

“oP aCe REY COPE CEE chs

Read the sentences below.

| was late for school but the feacher did not punish me.

| was late for school although the teacher did not punish me.
Although | was late for school, the teacher did not punish me.
Mary is taller than you but you are older than she is.

Mary is taller than you although you are older than she is.
Although you are older than Mary, she is taller than you.

SaRwWN>

a) In groups discuss when but and although are used.

Note: . .

(i) but and although are used to introduce a statement that seems surprising or
seems less true.

(ii) butis not used at the beginning of a sentence.

b) Make your own sentences using but and although.

Copy the letters and words below.

Oo Oo October is the only month whose name begins with the letter O.
Pp Pp Peter and Paul were private patients at Parirenyatwa Hospital.
Qq Qq Queen answered my question quickly.

Rr Rr Regina and Rebecca are real friends.

Ss’ Ss Samson and his sister Sally surprised us.

Ina summary, only the important points are mentioned and the unimportant details
are left out. )

Read through the story: Elina goes on a trip again.

de we,
ae,
pa



--- Page 44 ---
Then say the important points that tell us:

¢ who Elina is and what kind of girl she is

* where she lives and which school she goes to

° the unforgettable school trip they went on and what they saw and did.
Remember fo say all these in full, correct sentences. Afterwards write these as your
own summary of the story: Elina goes on a trip. Your summary should be in 30-40
words. :

WP ka

ie. av, beng
EUs aio MP

Imagine that you have just come back from an unforgettable school trip. Write a
letter to a relative about that school trip. Write your letter in 80 — 120 words. In the
letter, say:

* where you went, when, with whom

how you travelled

what you saw and did during the whole trip

what you learned during the trip

why this was an unforgettable trip.



--- Page 45 ---
* gi
eeereltislemivilate Fs

Listen carefully as the teacher reads this paragraph aloud and answer the questions
that follow. .

Learners from a rural school near Mutare went on three separate school trios. On
the first trip, the learners went on a long trip to Mutare. Their second trip to the
Great Zimbabwe Monuments was longer than the first one. Their third trip to the
Victoria Falls was the longest of all the three trips.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences:
Where did the learners go on their long trip?
Where did the learners go on their longer trip?
Where did the.learners go on their longest trip?
Which trip was the shortest?

Which trip was the longest?

Which was the longest journey you ever travelled?
Who is the shortest person you know?

Who of your two parents is taller than the other?

PNAEORWDN >

Ie a
A

=
me

Look at these three sentences

* The first school trio was long. (talking about one thing)

* The second trip was longer than the first one. (comparing two similar things)

* The third trip was the: longest of the three trips. (comparing three or more
similar things)

In the same way, say your own three sentences with the following adjectives:

clean small narrow fast clever cold slow sweet hot near tall smart

corte Whey oye

Complete the table on the next Page. The first line has been done for you as an example.



--- Page 46 ---
three or more things.

| onething | two things | three or more things |
better
| bad Worse pn
_
less pe
—
pil worse jp

far —
lighter pa
=
_ [most comfortable |
a a es
ja _——

Rewrite these sentences using the right form of the word in the brackets.

That hill is (far) from our school than the river.

This year the dam-has (little) water than last year.

The Victoria Falls are the (wonderful) of all tourist attractions in Zimbabwe.
To me, the Science lessons (difficult) than the language lessons.

Jane is the (pretty) girl in our village.

He went (far) with the research than his colleague.

To me, the crocodile is the (ugly) of all the animals that | have seen.
There are (many) girls than boys in our class.

CONAORWN>

Read this story told by a girl called Salome and then answer the questions that
follow.

Salome and the school trips

My name is Salome Mlambo. | am the younger sister to Elina who is six years older
than I. |am a learner at Gaza Primary, the school nearest to our home. | am now
in Grade five. | live with my parents, brothers and sisters in Chipinge.

Chipinge is built in @ mduntainous region. There are big and high mountains alll.
around Chipinge Town. The mountains are beautiful, with ever-green vegetation.

We sometimes go on school trips to the mountains around Chipinge Town. We
go by bus when the trips are long, and we go on foot when the trips are short.
Climbing the high mountains is difficult but exciting.

Last year we went on a longer school trio by bus to Chimanimani. Chimanimani
District is more mountainous than Chipinge District. The mountains in Chimanimani



--- Page 47 ---
are bigger, higher and more beautiful ‘than the mountains around Chipinge
Town. Climbing the more beautiful mountains in Chimanimani was more difficult
but more exciting than climbing the mountains around Chipinge. . __

co Pereanptandmemarere = .

as
r

Early this year we went on our longest school! trip to Nyanga District, farther north
of the city of Mutare. Nyanga is the.most mountainous district in Manicaland.
Of all the mountains that | know, the mountains in Nyanga are the biggest, the
highest and the most beautiful. Climbing the highest mountains in Nyanga was
the most difficult, but also the most exciting thing we have ever done on all our
school trips.

Answer the questions in full sentences.

Who was older between Salome and Elina?

Did Salome enjoy climbing the mountains or not?

Which is the most mountainous area of Manicaland Province?

Which one is the more mountainous between Chipinge and Chimanimani?
How would you describe Manicaland Province as a whole?

Where are the biggest.and highest mountcins that Salome knows?

What is it that Salome found most difficult but very exciting in the story?
Would you prefer to live in a mountainous cirea or in a flat area?

CONAANRWN>

(i) Listen carefully and say this sentence correctly after your teacher:

¢ The family has a dairy farm in the east of the country.
The letter y in the bold words sounds like the short vowel i.



--- Page 48 ---
Say the following words correctly, the letter y in them has a short i sound.
mystery hurry worry pyramid system cylinder dysentery pyjamas
daily syrup laundry sympathy syringe polygamy oxygen happy
polygon olympic rhythm physical hymn

(ii) Listen carefully and say the following sentence correctly after your teacher:
¢« A python is a type of a large snake.

Now the letter y in the bold words has a long i sound.

Say the following words correctly, the letter y in them has a short i sound.

cry nylon fly dry try reply supply apply
multiply cycle deny cyclone cyclist tyrant typhoid hygiene
hybrid dynamic pylon syphon hyphen bygone rely style

asylum typhoon _ lying

uc‘ing and dictation
Your teacher will read out some words and one paragraph from the story: Salome
and the school trips while you write them down.

_omparing

Imagine that you have three different brothers or three sisters in your family. Using
adjectives in the right form as you have learned, write a composition about the
three brothers or sisters, comparing them with each other correctly. Write your
composition in 80 -— 120 words. In your composition, write:

¢ their names and ages, comparing the ages

* compare their sizes and how they look

* compare what they do around the home

* compare how you like them and why.

a

In asummary, we write the main idea and the important information. We leave out
the unnecessary details.

We are now going to write a summary of the story: Salome and the school trips
which we have read. .

Here are some questions to guide you:

(i) Which of these is the main subject of the story that must feature in the summary?
A. Gaza Primary School B. The School trips
B. Salome Mlambo D. Chipinge District



--- Page 49 ---
(ii) Which of these is the main idea that should feature in the summary?
A: Chipinge is built in a mountainous regicn.
B. Salome, the younger sister of Elina Mlarnbo lives in Chipinge
C. Salome sometimes goes on school trips.
D. The mountains in Nyanga are the biggest and the highest.

(iii) Which two of the following sentences are important enough to be included in
the summary? :
(to help you, start by removing the sentences with the details that are not
important enough to be included in the summary) .

» Nyanga is the most mountainous district of Manicaland.

She is a learner at Gaza Primary School

. Climbing high mountains is difficult but exciting.

The learners at Gaza School sometimes go on school trips.

The learners go on school trips by bus or on foot.

Last year, the learners at Gaza School went on a trip by bus to Chimanimani.

MMO RD

Finally, using the answers that you gave in (i) — (iii) above, write the summary in
25 — 30 words. See to it that the sentences are arranged in a good sequence.

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Indigenous trees

Zimbabwe has many indigenous trees. Most of these trees are deciduous. They
shed their leaves and grow new ones annually. The various parts of some of
these indigenous trees can be used as medicines. They can be used to cure —
diseases. Some of the indigenous trees bear fruits. Some fruits are Poisonous,
while others are not only delicious, but also nourishing and medicinal.

Itis believed that our ancestors who had no modern medicines but lived healthy

' lives as a result of using these medicinal fruits. The ancestors had a scientific way
of identifying poisonous fruits from the safe ard edible ones. They watched the
feeding habits of animals like baboons and monkeys over a period of time.
Whatever fruits these animals ate was not poisonous and therefore, edible by
humans.

Complete the questions below in full, correct sentences.
' 1. Deciduous trees are the trees that .



--- Page 50 ---
SP ne ee RN I ant nite

3. A seasonal fruit is not found throughout the year, but only . a . .
4. Our ancestors lived healthy lives because they ate wild fruits which were

5. The word ‘edible’ describes fruits or things that can be

6. The scientific way our ancestors used for identifying the poisonous fruits from

the safe and edible ones was by .
7. Food is said to be when it has a very pleasant taste.

Explain to the teacher the scientific way used by our ancestors in identifying the

Your teacher will call out one of the paragraphs from the passage Indigenous
trees while you write it neatly and quickly.

7, x

By selecting only two of the following sentences, write a summary of the passage: :
‘Indigenous trees on the previous page. Your summary should have 25 — 30 words. .

Indigenous trees

Zimbabwe has many indigenous trees most of which are deciduous.

used as medicines.

* Our ancestors had a scientific way of identifying poisonous fruits from the safe ,

and edible ones.

Our.ancestors lived healthy lives by using medicines from the indigenous trees. ,

Some fruits from the indigenous trees are delicious while others are poisonous. |
Some of the trees bear delicious fruits while others have parts that can be .



--- Page 51 ---
Jsing sugges

Read the following sentences:

1. When there is lightning and thunder, | suggest that you stay indoors.

2. During school days, | suggest that you go to bed early.

3. When there is a strong wind outside, | suggest that you close the windows.

(i) Choose the correct answer.
To suggest is to
A: force people to do something B. remind people about something
C. say something that people dislike D. offer an idea ora plan

(ii) Using suggest answer these questions in full sentences:
What do you suggest

1. to the farmers? 2. to the people in your area?

3. to the learners in your class? 4, ona very hot day?

5. onavery cold day? 6. toa friend going on a long journey?
7. toa friend who cannot do his/her homework?

In groups of eight read the following dialogue and answer the questions that follow.

the adjourned meeting»

‘brilliant ‘wisdom ‘suggestion arrogant ‘challenge shy

‘support dare adjourn rubbish = ward consult,

Narrator: ~ In arural area, Headman Shumba is holding a meeting with
a his Village Heads.
Headman Shumba: |. have called you to this important meeting at short notice. |
*=- would like us to decide on building either a school or a clinic
in our ward. What do you say about that?
Village Head Siziba: Thank you very much, Headman Shumba, for coming up with
‘this brilliant idea. Last week, | was thinking about the same



--- Page 52 ---
idea but dic not know how to go about it. This is because
lam a clever person. | got my cleverness from the school
| went to when | was still young. | say very. strongly that we
should build a school. There is no need to waste time talking
about the clinic.

Village Head Shoko: Sir, | agree with Village Head Siziba. | suggest that we start

building the school right away.

Village Head Masuku: Sir, | beg to cliffer with both Village Heads Siziba and Shoko. |

do not see the wisdom in building a school ahead of a clinic.
In fact, | do not see any wisdom in the two men. They are
too young te tell us what to do. They should just listen and do
what we, the senior Village Heads, tell them to do. | suggest
very strongly that we build a clinic, not a school.

Village Head Shoko: Sir, | beg to change my mind. | now support Village Head

Masuku's idea to build a clinic. Village Head Masuku has a

lot of wisdom. So | suggest that we do as he suggests.

Village Head Matika: Some people do not see ahead as | do. We should build

Village Head Nyoni:

Village Head Ndou:

Narrator:

neither the school nor the clinic. Instead, | suggest that we

= should build a dam.

Rubbish! Who do you think you are to come up with a new
suggestion like that? You are very arrogant. You always look
down upon other Village Heads. iP s not right. | challenge
you to a fight if you dare!

Ah! Ah! No fighting please! | will support whatever. this
meeting decides to do.

Seeing that the disagreements could lead to a fist fight,
Village Head Mangena quietly left the meeting. He was too



--- Page 53 ---
afraid to speak at the meeting. Village Head Gumbo was also
too shy to speak. Instecd, he hid among the taller Village
~ Heads and said nothing throughout the heated meeting.

Headman Shumba: | am very disappointed with you alll Some of you are
. peacocks, they are very proud of themselves. Some of you
are owls, they think they are the wisest. Some of you are
chameleons, they change quickly. Some of you are lions,
they think fighting is the way to solve problems. Some of you
are hares, they run away from challenges. Some of you are
tortoises, they are too shy to speak out their mind. So | will
adjourn this meeting so that you can go back to your villages
and consult the people. Then we will continue with the
meeting next week when we know what the people want.

Answer these questions in full sentences.

Which village head thought that he was a clever person?

What did Village Head Matika suggest to the meeting?

Who wanted a dam built instead of a school or a clinic?

Which of the Village Heads at this meeting would you describe as ‘cowardly'?
Did Village Head Masuku agree with Village Heads Shoko and Siziba?

Do you think that Village Head Nyoni was friendly or hostile to Village Head
Matika?

Why did Headman Shumba call the village heads to a meeting?

If someone calls you 'a chameleon’, what does that mean?

SO PWN>

gO ™

Choose the meaning of the words in bold from the way they are used in the story:
The adjourned meeting.
1. A brilliant person or idea is one that is

A. very intelligent or successful B. very stupid

2. Wisdom is the ability to .
’ A. make wise decisions B. disagree with other people

3. Achallenge is something that needs a lot cf .

A. skill, energy and will power to solve B. money to solve
4. Apperson who is arrogant thinks that other people are .

A. better than him/her B. other people are not as good as he/she is
5. Anidea is

A. something that you keep forgetting all the time

B.. a thought about what to do or how to do something
6. To suggest is .

A. to offer a thought (an idea) or a plan in a polite way

B. to speak without stopping ~



--- Page 54 ---
7. To dare is .
A. to be afraid to do something _B. not to be afraid to do something
8. To adjourn something, like a meeting is to .
A. continue doing something
B. stop doing something for a while, then continue later
9. To consult other people is to __
A. discuss with them and then make a decision
B. report to them what has been said by someone

’

From the dialogue you have read on the Previous page answer these questions. in
full sentences.

Answer like this:

When he said some of yOu are peacocks, Headman Shumba was referring to

Who was Headman Shumba referring to when he said:

(i) some of you are peacocks? (ii) some of you are chameleons?
(iii) some of you are owls? (iv) some of you are hares?

(v) some of you are lions? (vi) some of you are tortoises?

Example: Headman Matika made a suggestion to build a dam.

The noun suggestion is from the verb suggest.

(a) Rewrite these sentences with the nouns formed from the verbs in brackets.

1. In Zimbabwe, there is an (elect) after every five years. :

2. The (construct) of the new road requires heavy machinery.

3. The teacher wants us to do our (correct) after the lessons.

4. There was an electrical (interrupt) during the storm.

5S. |haveno (intent) to travel during the holidays.

6. (Corrupt) is a serious crime.

7. Wherever she goes, the country's First Lady becomes the cenire of (attract).

8. He started smoking when he was young and now smoking has become an
(addict) to him. >

(b) First say, then write thie nouns formed from these verbs.
Note that the e atthe end of the verb is dropped when you write the noun.
create dictate decorcite negotiate suffocate rotate separate
contribute calculate navigate cultivate Contribute hesitate imitate

Se ee ee Wess
Sap



--- Page 55 ---
e The locusts came and ate all the cotton plants.
What is the sound of the ¢ in ca-, co- and cu- ?

(b) Say the following sentence correctly after your teacher:
* My niece received a parcel of citrus fruits.
What is the sound of ¢€ in ce- and ci- ?

(c) Say the following sentence correctly after your teacher:
e | poured the juicy drink in a cylinder.
What is the sound of the ¢ in cy?

(d) Group words that have the same c sound

cigarette . policy colourful custom citizen biscuits
decent companion location accuracy ceremony decorate
civilians). carpenter = cynical society recent couple
justice cyclist according mercy century pharmacy

Look at what Village Head Nyoni said at the meeting and how it is written:

Village Head Nyoni: Rubbish! Who do you think you are to come up with a new
suggestion like that? You are very arrogant. You always look
down upon other Village Heads. It's not right. | challenge
you to a fight if you dare!

We use the exclamation mark to show emotions such as anger, surprise, wonder,

happiness, excitement, raised voice, crying out, etc.

Examples:

(a). Fikile said, “Happy birthday to you, Sam!"

(b) | replied, “Oh! Thank you very much!”

(c) Then Freddy sung aloud, “How old are you now?”
(d): “I’m twelve years old now!” | sung in response.

Note: The actual words spoken by someone are put inside quotation marks.

Rewrite the following sentences correctly with quotation marks and the exclamation
mark. Note that the actual words spoken always begin with a capital letter and
end with a full stop or a question mark if it is a question.

When | won the first prize, Mary said to me congratulations, Cecilia

Goodness me shouted father when he saw a big rat in the house.

Forward with unity the chief started the meeting with the famous slogan

The angry mothershouted at the children look what you have done now
Father, who was also angry asked how could you do this

When | scored with the penalty kick, the spectators shouted goal

When he asked me if | wanted to be his friend, | said never

Oh what a wonderful story the teacher said after | told the class my story.

CONAORWNT



--- Page 56 ---
In 30 words, write a summary of the story: The adjourned meeting using the following
guidelines: .

¢ Who called the meeting?

* What was the meeting for?

* Did the meeting achieve its objective, why?

¢ What was decided at the end of this meeting?

Write a formal letter to the Councillor making a proposal or a suggestion to the
council to do or to build something for the community in your area. Write the body
of your letter in 80 — 120 words, Using the framework and the ideas given below:

Your address Co

a

Date
eee

The Councillor
His/Her address

Dear Sir/Madam

eee
RE: A PROPOSAL TO (state what you want the council to do or to build)

ap co re
[ wish to make a humble proposal to the council to

a
in our area.
CR
op pe eee
= -
,
* how it will benefitzor help the cornmunity

a
a me
° what you believe the community can do to help

Tonk Fore eee
1 look forward to:a favorable response.
ns

Yours faithfully

(then, in paragraphs say)
* where, when, why or what for

(Your full names)



--- Page 57 ---
i

“ne sound of ow in words like pillow and swallew

First, say the lines of this poem correctly after your teacher. Afterwards take turns to
recite the poem.

Sometimes!

Sometimes, :

With elbows folded,

When I've nowhere to borrow what | need,
And life seems slow and hollow,

| look through my narrow window with sorrow,
And hope that a better tomorrow will follow.

ton tecued af ow in words like how and cow

First, say the lines of this poem correctly after your teacher. Afterwards take turns to
recite the poem.

A clown in town

There's a clown in town
Always with a brown gown on. |
He smears brown powder on his face

And ties a brown towel round his neck.

| However, the brown towel round his neck,

Allows his neck to*move round:

Now and again the town crowds howl with laughter

When the clown bows down and frowns
Or moos aloud like my father’s brown cow.



--- Page 58 ---
The two neighbours

borrow ——ilend grinding =———SsStray
deserves hurried exclaimed

Magama and Zimuto were neighbours in one village. The former grew vegetables
in a small garden while the latter kept a few chickens. Both had small families
to look after. Whenever they needed a little cash, Magama sold some of his
vegetables and Zimuto sold one of his chickens.

One day Magama needed a little cash. He hurried to his small garden to get
some vegetables to sell. When he got there, he saw that some goats had broken
into the garden and eaten the vegetables. He was very sad.

After mending the hole in the fence, Magama hurried to Zimuto and said, “May |
borrow a little cash from you? | have run out of mealie-meal and | need to go to
the grinding mill right away.”

Zimuto asked, “Oh! How much money do you need?"

“Just five dollars! That should be enough.” replied Magama.

Clee i ee ne —.



--- Page 59 ---
“Luckily, | have just sold one of my chickens so lam able to lend you that money,”
Zimuto told Magama.

Magama then said, "Thank you so much. You are such a good neighbour.”

“Don't mention it! It is a pleasure to help you, my good neighbour,” answered
Zimuto as he handed the money to Magama.

Two months later, a stray dog broke into Zimuto's chicken-run and ate the two
cocks that were ready for sale. At the same time, Zimuto had visitors for whom he
wanted to prepare lunch. He needed vegetables but had no cash to buy them
and no chickens fo sell.

He hurried to Magama and said, “May | please borrow some vegetables. | have
important visitors for whom | want to prepare lunch.” :

Magama replied, “| will not lend you the vegetables. Instead | will just give you
the vegetables you need.”

“Oh! Really! That's very kind of you. You are such a good neighbour!" exclaimed
Magama.

“Not at alll You tog have always been good and helpful to me. Now it's my turn
to help you also,” Magama told Zimuto.

One good turn deserves another.



--- Page 60 ---
Answer the following questions in full, correct sentences.

Who between Magama and Zimuto grew vegetables?

For what did Magama need a iittle cash?

What had happened to the vegetables?

Why did Zimuto want vegetables? ,
What does it mean to say that Magama had run out of mealie-meal?
Why did Zimuto have no chickens to sell?

Did Magama lend some vegetables to Zimuto?

Which word used in the passage means the opposite of ‘lend’?

CONAARWN >

, fre former cond the tatter

Read the first two sentences in The wo neighbours.
* Who is the former and who is the latter?
We use: (i) the former to refer to the first of two names mentioned and
(ii) the latter to refer to the second of the two names mentioned.
This helps.us not to keep repeating the names which would be boring sometimes. In
the same way, make your own pdirs of sentences using the former and the latter.

The story: The two neighbours ends with the proverb one good turn deserves
another. The proverb means that when you do good to some people, they will also
do good to you one day. Below are some common English proverbs. First say each
one of the proverbs. .
(a) A friend in need is a friend indeed.
(5) Half a loaf is better than nothing.
(C) Look before you leap.

) Rome was not built in a day.

) Some men are wise and some are otherwise.
(f) When in Rome,do as the Romans do.

Complete the following statements with a suitable proverb from the list above.

1. When you want to tell someone to think carefully before doing something, .
YOU say, ' " °

2. When you want to tell a friend who has given you some help that he/she is a
really good friend of yours, you say, ' "

3. When you want to tell someone to do things in the same way other people
around him/her are doing, you say, ' ",

oR,

=F
Ae



--- Page 61 ---
‘os quotation marks

When you want to say that something thaz you already have, no matter how
small, is better than having nothing at all you say,

When you want to say that big things, or important things take time to build or
to achieve, you say, '

When you want to say that some, but not all people are clever or wise, you say,

os 3

Look at the quotation marks used in the story: The two neighbours. Quotation marks
indicate the actual words spoken by someone.

Rewrite the following sentences with the right punctuation marks.

ONAOARWN>

We said to the teacher we are sorry for corning late.

The teacher asked us why you are late for school.

| answered | got up late.

Two other learners answered the bus was late.

Then the teacher said do not be late again tomorrow.

We alll said thank you.

One of the boys asked can anyone please lend me a pen. | cannot find mine.
| quickly handed him a pen saying here you are.

nrg in inferrnal letter

Write a letter to your neighbour borrowing something. The body of your letter should
be 80 - 120 words in length. In the letter, say:

what you would like to borrow
why you want to borrow, how you will use it, where, when
when you hope to return it.

Write a summary of the story: The two neighbours using these guidelines:
¢ who the two neighbours were

¢ what they did to each sther

Write your summary in 30 words.



--- Page 62 ---
_ Mafa and Tembo went to Mrs

Read this passage silently and then answer the questions that follow.

Borrowing and lending

Mrs Nyathi agreed to lend a ho
days, the former returned the hoe in good condition: The latt

not return the hoe for three, ... five, ...nine days. On the tenth day, Mrs Nyathi. :
hen Tembo finally sent back the hoe, its
metal blade. From that day .

reminded Tembo to return the hoe. W
handle was broken and there weis a crack on the
onwards, Mrs Nyathi stopped lending any of her tools to Tembo.

Answer the questions in full sentences.

ONKAoMAWH —

. What happened for Tembo to return the hoe?
. Who between Mafa and Tembo was trustworthy?

. Who was lending the hoes?

. For how long did she agree to lend the hoes?

. How many hoes did she lend out altogether?
Who returned the hoe on time?

Who did not return the hoe on time?

Give two reasons why Mrs Nyathi stopped lending any of his tools to Tembo.

Tm Ie eterna teeth neem a ane e, ey meen sw, ee rein earner agen ae my a ae aeey mt ane aes eet ees meprennseomuepernans Sacer a nates see nes et oa re ee

Nyathi to borrow hoes to weed their gardens.
€ each to the two men for two days. After two .

er, however, did ;



--- Page 63 ---
Cae Hay Ditiioe
wet,

ate tk lf
we

Listen carefully as your teacher reads what one teacher told the class.

What | will do during the holidays

During the holidays, | will travel by air to the city of Harare. Our plane will take off
from the Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo International Airport just outside Bulawayo,
the City of Kings. Then the plane will fly north-eastwards and finally land in Harare.
From Harare, | will travel by road northwards to. Chinhoyi. | will spend a week in
Chinhoyi, seeing the legendary Chinhoyi Caves and climbing hills around.

From what the teacher has read to you, answer these questions in full, correct

sentences.

Where will the teacher travel to during the holidays?

How will the teacher travel there?

Where will the plane take off from?

Which city in Zimbabwe is also known as the City of Kings?

For how long will the teacher stay in Chinhoyi?

How will the teacher spend the time in Chinhoyi?

Would you say that the teacher was looking forward to, or not looking forward

fo his journey to Chinhoyi?

8. Which word used in the passage tells us that the Chinhoyi Caves were very
famous or well-known for a long time?

NAaARWN>

‘q
|

Read the passage on the following page and answer the questions that follow.

Browsing the internet

sige neem tennant anne

browse , internet natural boundary generating _ transmitted
hoisted pylons plantations constructed reservoir island
destination



--- Page 64 ---
George was going to Lake Kariba during the next school holidays. He was going
there to visit Tom, his uncle, who is a fisherman there. This was going to be George's
first trio to Lake Kariba. He was looking forward to it with a lot of excitement.
Meanwhile, George was browsing the internet everyday to learn more about
Lake Kariba. You too can browse the internet if you want to know more about
any famous place. This is what George found out about Lake ‘Kariba from the
internet:

Lake Kariba is a man-made lake on the Zambezi River that forms the natural
boundary between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The lake was constructed to store
water for generating electricity. This is the electricity we use today in our homes, in
the factories, in the mines, and in the towns and cities. The electricity is transmitted
throughout the country from Lake Kariba in thick cables that are hoisted on huge
metal pylons.

3

Lake Kariba is the largest lake in Zimbabwe, followed by the Tokwe-Mukosi Lake,
and then Lake Mutirikwi. Unlike Lake Kariba, the other two lakes were constructed
to store water for irrigating the sugar cane plantations in the southern lowveld.

Lake Kariba is two hundred and eighty kilometres long. Its length is equal to the
distance between thé cities of Harare and Masvingo. The creation of the Lake
Kariba reservoir, or water storage covered a lot of land that was the home of
the Tonga people living along the Zambezi River. The Tonga people had to be
moved and resettled elsewhere. : ;

The lake wall is five hundred and seventy-nine metres long and one hundred and
twenty-eight metres high. That means the height of the lake wall is more than the
length of a football field.



--- Page 65 ---
ee

One of the islandsin the middle of the lake, a favourite destination for many tourists
is Fothergill Island. Tourists from all over the warld spend a lot of time relaxing on
Fothergill Island.

Choose the correct answer.
1. George was going to Lake Kariba asa___ .
A. learner BB. fisherman ___C. tourist D. writer
2. Why was George so excited about the trip to Lake Kariba?
A. He was visiting Uncle Tom. B. He had never been there before.
C. He liked fishing very much. D. He was going to see the Tonga people.
3. Whereas Lake Kariba is man-made, the Zambezi River is .
A. natural B. very long C. abourndary D. alake
4. Lake Kariba was constructed .
A. to store water for irrigating the sugar cane plantations
B. in order to move and resettle the Tonga people elsewhere
C. to form the boundary between Zambia and Zimbabwe
D, to store water for generating electricity
5. Why were the Tonga people living along the Zambezi River moved and resettled
elsewhere?
A. So that the fishermen could catch more fish with the big nets.
B. Their land was going to be covered by the lake water.
C. To make way for the tourists visiting Lake Kariba.
D. They had no boats to sail on the lake.
6. The height of the wall of Lake Kariba is___
less than the length of a football field .
equal to the distance between the city of Harare and Masvingo
more than the length of a football field
five hundred and seventy-nine metres
is a water storage.
boundary © B. reservoir
. destination D. plantation
8. Something is said to man-made whenitis.
A. built by people B. created by God for the people ©
C. made to last for a long time D. very useful to many people

O>>00">

When writing a summary:
* write only the important points and leave out the unnecessary details

roan a



--- Page 66 ---
* youmay use your own words without changing the story that you are summarising
¢ write the summary in full, correct sentences.

In 30 words, write a summary of what George found out on the internet about Lake
Kariba.

Example: George will travel to Lake Kariba during the holidays.
We use will for saying what is planned or expected in the future.
(i) In the same way, say your own sentences using will.

Complete the following sentences with wil and suitable endings or beginnings:
1. When! grow up

When the rain comes

When | see him/her

When | get some money

When the schools close.

when | get home today.

when | feel hungry again.

when the bell rings.

PNA MER WH

Example: Will you please come and sing at my birthday party tomorrow.
We also use will for asking or inviting someone in a polite way.
(ii) In the same way, say your own sentences using will.

eS ee oe ae St? im
fess 1! t 2 wee ad he

Example: Although mother was willing to take us on holiday, father was unwilling.
The words willing and unwilling are opposites.

By adding ::.. to one of the words, change the sentences below to mean the
opposite. a *
. That flower has a very pleasant smell.
The jacket he was wearing was suitable for the weather.
The referee made decisions that were fair to our team.
It is quite usual to get heavy rains at this time of the year.
Nowadays, many school-leavers are employed.
Throughout the meeting, that man was very reasonable.
The little boy was able to open the gate for us.
The stranger was grateful for the food you gave him.

ONXORWN =



--- Page 67 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher shows you and explains the following:

The directory

A directory is a book or list of people’s names, addresses, telepnone numbers
and:other information. Like in a dictionary, the names of people in a directory
are listed in alphabetical order, i.e. beginning with the names starting with A,
followed by the names starting with B, and then onto the names starting with
C nd soon in that order, ending with the names starting with Z, the last letter of
the alphabet. Listing the names in alphabetical order makes it easier to find the
name one may be looking for.

Answer these questions:

1. What is a directory?

2. In which other book are the words listed in alphabetical order?

3. What is the benefit of listing the words or the names in alphabetical order?

4. List the (a) first names of the learners in your group in alphabetical order

(b) surnames of the learners in your group in alphabetical order.

5. List the following names taken from a directory in alphabetical order:

Moyo J. Gumbo B._ PindeniS. Banda W. Jones X. Khupe L.

1. (a) These are some of the famous places in Zimbabwe:

¢ The Victoria Falls ¢ The Chinhoyi Caves

e The Mana Pools e¢ The Eastern Highlands

e The Matobo Hills ¢ The National Heroes Acre
e¢ The Great Zimbabwe Ruins * Hwange National Park

 (b) These are some of-the famous people, places and events of Zimbabwe:
e  Jairos Jiri e Joshua Nkomo

Africa Day ¢ Charles Mungoshi

Matobo Hills e Heroes Day

Oliver Mtukudzi ¢ Chinhoyi Battle of the Second Chimurenga

Gona-re-Zhou ; ,

Find out about any one famous place or person of your choice by browsing the
internet, from the magazines or from other people. Then, in 80 - 120 words write a
composition about that place or that person.



--- Page 68 ---
2. When he was growing up, Jimu believed that life in the city was

Engl

Time: | hour 30 minutes (Total marks: 40)
Read the passage below and answer the questions below.

When Jimu was growing Up, he admired people returning from the city where
they worked. Some of them wore new clothes, while others drove their own
cars. Jimu made up his mind to go to the city one day in order to also enjoy the
good life.

That day arrived after some years at school and Jimu told his parents what he
had on his mind. The parents, however, were not for the idea. They had heard
of some people's sons and daughters who went to the city and never returned.
They had heard too, of people who got run over by motor-cars in the city. They
were afraid that these bad things could also happen to their only child.

Jimu's parents gave their son some cattle and a piece of land. They also
Promised to pay all the bride price when Jimu decided to get married one day.
All this was to make Jimu change: his mind, not that they had too many cattle
themselves. That, however did nct happen.

After some long and hard talking, Jimu's parents finally let him go. When Jimu
arrived in the city he got disappointed. The people there were unfriendly and
he felt lonely. To add to that, there were no jobs for him. The worst thing for Jimu
was that he was spending the cold nights in the open.

To admire is to look at someone or something that you
A. dislike a lot .

B. think is attractive or very good

C. believe is harmful to many people

D. do not want for yourself

A. very difficult B. not for him”

C. only for his parents D. very good |

3. Jimu made up his mind to go to the city one day. .
Which word means the same as the Underlined phrase in the sentence above?

D. travelled

A. decided . feared C. agreed



--- Page 69 ---
4, How many children did Jimu's parents have?
A. One ‘B. None C. Many D. Three
5. Which.of these statements is true?
A. Jimu's parents admired the people returning from the city.
B. Jimu's parents wanted their son to go to the city.
C. Jimu's parents did not like their son to go to the city.
~ D. Jimu's parents went to the city with their son.
6. Why did Jimu’s parents give him some cattle and a piece of land?
A. For him to pay the bride price.
B. For him to sell and get money to travel to the city.
C. .To stop him:from thinking about going to the city.
D. They had too many cattle themselves.
7. When Jimu went to the city, he was
| A. already married B. not yet married
.C. driving his own car D. -dressec in new clothes
8. What disappointed Jimu when he arrived in the city?
A. The people there were unfriendly and he was lonely.
B. There were no jobs for him.
C. He had to spend the cold nights in the open.
D. There was too much money and so many jobs.

Choose the correct word to complete the sentences.
9. Maria and Janet are friends. The former is the daughter of Mr Mafu and the
latter is the daughter of Mr Shambo. The latter is

A. Maria B. Janet C. Mr Mafu D. Mr Shambo
10. When one is grown-up like you, one should be able to wash
A. himself B. herself C.themselves D. oneself

Choose the most suitable adjective.
V1. A river is one that is flowing throughout the year.
A. seasonal B. wide C. long D. perennial
(12. It was very difficult fo construct a road across the region.
A. prosperous B. fertile C. famous D. mountainous
13. A piano and a guitar are both instruments.
- A. traditional 8B. national  C. musical D. original
‘14. Trees that shed. their leaves and grow new ones every year are
A. deciduous _ B. fruitful C. beautiful D. ever-green

‘Choose the correct tense of the verb.

15. | do not go to bed before | have my homework.
A. do ~. done . C. doing D. did
16. | have never __- my mother talking like that before.

A. seen ‘B.. saw C. see D. seeing



--- Page 70 ---
Y

to 18s aes Aewenanepeneney OAR nae en et a ete ce oy anita emanates rat re 7

17. lalways go to church when have some tea.

A. drink B. drank C. drunk D. drinking
18. John, as well as Peter absent from school yesterday.
A. were B. was C. have D. are

Read the poem below and answer the questions below it.

The traveller

Day in, day out

You never stop travelling

From the east to the west.
Everyday at dawn, we see you

Like a red ball:

As you start your long journey

From the distant horizon in the east.

Then you Keep us warm all day,

And light our pathways

Like a big lamp,

AS you cut across the blue Sky

From the east to the west.

Then at dusk

Before you switch Off the light

For us to go to bed

We see you again

Like a red ball

AS you sink in the distant horizon in the west.
Except when there are dark clouds,

That's when we don't see you,

But we know yOu will always be there for us,
Day in, day out.

19. This poem is talking about .
A. travelling 8. the clouds . the horizon Dp. the sun
20. When is dawn? ’ ;
A. At midday. B, At mid-night. C. At sunrise. D. Atsunset.
21. The i

Period of time at the end of the day just before it gets dark is called

se ~

A. dawn B. dusk C. horizon D. day out
22. The is the line in the distance where the. earth and the Sky seem to:

meet.

A. horizon B. east C. sky D. west



--- Page 71 ---
23. The ‘phrase d lay in, _day out! means _

A... everyday B. day and night

C. one day D. no daylight
24, What does a lamp do?

A. It gives light.

B. It gives warmth.
C. It travels from the east to the west.
D, It looks ike. red ball. -

‘Choose the correct word.
25. The vu inthe word dusk has the same sound as the u in the word

. AL push B. bull C. ambusn D. brush
‘26. The .¢ in the word cylinder has the same sound as the c in the word
A. corrupt .B. receive Cc. accurcte D. customs

:Which word means the same as the underlined word?
27. The industrious worker was awarded the worker of the month prize.

A. lazy B. hard-working C. best D. strong
28. Luckily, no-one was injured in the traffic accident.
: A. Sadly -B. Fortunately C. Seriously D. Surprisingly
29. When he was asked, he answered in a few words.

A. said B. explained C. talked D. replied
Choose the correct preposition to complete the sentence.
30. Chivhu is half-way Harare and Masvingo.

A. between  B. to C. from D. on
31. | visited the airport and saw big aeroplanes landing and taking

A. away B. off C. up D. down
32. Next month we are going holiday.

A. for B. to Cc. on D. by
33. lam very afraid____———s Snakes.

A. with B. for C. by D. of

‘Which word means the opposite of the underlined word?
.34. | grew up in the rural area.

A. farming — B. urban C. tourist D. modern
35. The banks sometimes borrow money.
: A. buy B. give Cc. lend D. earn
36. When the president arrived, the people moved forward.

A.. backward B. quickly C. up D. down

Choose the correct word to complete the sentence.
37. There were many people who voted in the last .
A. elect 'B. elected C. election D. electing



--- Page 72 ---
38. Nowadays the farmers are practicing crop

A. rotates B. rotation C. rotating D. rotated
39. Either James or his brother ____ coming to see us today.
A. are B. were C. is D. has
40. | have not to them for a very long time.
A. speak B. speaking C. spoke * D. spoken |

_ English Paper 2

Time: | hour 45 minutes

SECTION A COMPOSITION (20 marks)
You are advised to spend 1 hour on this section.

Answer either 1 or 2, but not both.
1. Write a composition with this beginning:

‘l was walking some ten fo fifteen metres behind my father and mother in the city.
Then, suddenly there were crowds of people between us and | could not see my
parents.

Give your composition a good heading. Your composition should be 80 — 120
words in length.

2. You know that you are going to be absent from school for the next two or |
three days. Write a formal/business letter to your teacher telling him about .
your absence. The body of your letter should be 80 — 120 words in length. In the . | :
letter, write:

* that you are sorry that you are going to be absent from school
* where you will be and what you will be doing .

ud * ask your teacher to send you some homework. | er

¥
~”
=



--- Page 73 ---
SECTIONB COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15MARKS)
You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.

(i) Comprehension (10 marks) .

Read this passage and then answer the questions below.

A barking dog at night

Our family dog had been barking continuously and we all got worried. We
feared that it could be another gang of thieves after the one that had stolen
our chickens before.

When father went out to check and did not return quickly we got more
worried. Then mother took a torch and followed, but also did not return. With
our hearts beating fast, my sister and | took a bright lamp and followed outside.

We found both father and mother in the deep open pit that father had dug
to construct a blair toilet. Father had seen a stray dog and knew immediately
why our dog had been barking continuously. On chasing the stray dog round
the house, father fell into the pit and could not get out. When mother tried to
pull father out of the pit, she too fell into the same pit. Now both were in the
deep pit and the two of us were not.strong enough to pull them out.

Then my sister, Anita, had a clever idea. We took a long, strong rope from the
house and tied one end of it to a tree beside the deep pit. Then we threw the
other end of the rope into the pit where our parents were. Father grabbed
that end of the rope and heaved himself out of the pit. Then he pulled mother
out and the job was done.

Questions

How many people were in this happening?

What was the family dog barking at?

When they heard the family dog barking continuously, what did they think?
Where did the children find their parents when they followed outside?

Whose plan was it to make use of the rope to get the two parents out of the
_ pit?

6. Would you say that this story happened during daylight or during the night?

7. Why were they all worried at the beginning of the story?

8. Why had father dug the deep pit behind the house?
9.
1

oO RWN >

ee a

Why did the two children not pull their parents out of the pit?
0. Would you say inks story has a sad ending or a happy ending?

(ii) Summary (5 Shirts)
In 30 words write a summary of the story: A barking dog at night.



--- Page 74 ---
1. Listen carefully as the teacher reads Tanaka's short experience.

A short holiday experience

One day | got up at sunrise and went to the shops. When | came back at noon,
| sat on a wooden stool near the door of the kitchen. Then | heard some noises
from inside the kitchen. | was surprised because | knew there was nobody in the
kitchen. When | opened the door our black cat saw a rat. The cat ran after the
rat, caught it and ate it.

2. Answer these questions in full, correct sentences:

At what time did Tanaka get up?

Where did Tanaka go?

When did Tanaka come back from the shops?

Where did Tanaka sit?

What did Tanaka hear?

Why was Tanaka surprised?

What did the black cat see when: Tanaka opened the door?
What did the black cat do fo the rat?

CONDOR WN>

Take turns to tell the class your short experience from the school holidays. Remember
to use the past tenses of the verbs or action words. Begin your short story this way:

One day during the school holidays,

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

fortnight experiences aboard island crocodile
harbor delicious helicopter diary

George tells the class his holiday experiences

When the schools reopened, every learner in the class wanted to hear about
George’s holiday experiences. This is what George said:

As | said last term, | went to Lake Kariba during the holidays. | spent a fortnight
there. During those two weeks, | wrote all my day-to-day experiences in my diary.
| visited many places and saw many things around Lake Kariba.



--- Page 75 ---
a ee

One day Uncle Tom took me along on the fishing boat. There were many fishermen
aboard. The fishermen threw large fishing nets into the deep water of the lake
and caught many fish. | enjoyed seeing how the fishermen did their work as a
team.

Uncle Tom also took me to Fothergill Island in the middle of the lake. We sailed
from the harbour to the island in a large boat, twice the size of this classroom.
Aboard the same boat were many other tourists from different countries. There
were more tourists enjoying themselves on the sandy beach along the coast of
Fothergill Island.

We had lunch on the boat that day. For the first time | ate crocodile tail meat. It
was very delicious. The majority of the tourists also enjoyed the fried crocodile tail
meat. :

While we were on Fothergill Island, some tourists hired a helicopter. They flew
over the lake for about one hour. | did not fly with them, but on their return, | was
allowed to get into the helicopter. | told the pilot that one day | will also become
a pilot like him.

The other places | visited were the Crocodile Farm, the Crafts Centre and the
game reserve around the lake. On the visit to the game reserve, we came as
near as about ten metres from a pride of lions. We also passed near a big herd of
buffaloes. We were able to get so near in the safety of Uncle Tom's car.



--- Page 76 ---
One day, Uncle Tom drove his family and | over the hill to the large lake wall.
While there, Uncle Tom and | took a walk across from the Zimbabwean side to the
Zambian side. The walk took us five minutes to complete.

| will never forget my holiday visit to Lake Kariba.

Choose the correct answers to these questions: |
1. A fortnight is a period of . |
A. fourdays  B. forty days C. twoweeks D, the holiday
2. When people work as a team, they are .
A. working as one group B. playing a game of football :
C. watching others working D. working one by one |
3. People who visit places on holiday are called

A. visitors B. foreigners  C. travellers D. tourists
4. Apiece of land that is completely surrounded by water is called _—
A. anisland B. ghill
C. asandy beach D. a harbour
5S. George sawa of lions.
A. game B. reserve C. pride D. herd |
6. Which word best describes food that has a pleasant taste or smell? |
A. enjoyed B. fried C. cooked D. delicious
7. Which word tells us that most of the tourists liked the crocodile tail meat?
A. many B. majority C. more D. some
8. A large area where wild animals are kept safe is called a
A. lake B. beach

C. game reserve - D. crafts centre

= Oust tense
Say the past tense for each of the verbs below. Some of them are in the story.

|
|
write speak go . do see come — drink |

drive know say sell drink. take catch I,
throw fell eat make kneel fall write :
get can spend run fly give think |

Make your own short sentences with the past tenses of the verbs above. Begin your
sentences with any one of these:
One day . Yesterday
Last week/month/year
During the holidays

Once upon a time |

.
—



--- Page 77 ---
Practise good handwriting with the following letters and sentences, writing quickly.

Tt Tt Time and again, Thomas and Timothy start a fight.
Uu Uu-~ Uncle Ushe waited for us until sunset.
Vv Ww Vivian Veremu from Vainona is very vivacious.

Ww Ww When will wise Willie walk with Watson?

tg Be cy wen oh

Say this sentence correctly to your teacher:
Sometimes we have sports in the morning.
Note that the ris silent in the words sports and morning.

Say the following words correctly. The rin them is silent.

force northern order torch”~—sorchard ~— forward fortunate
forecast _ tortoise border _ forty portable normal important

orphan _storm cena

Your teacher will read out the new words at the beginning of the story: George fells
the class his holiday experiences while you write them down.

“ orrrarizing

Say this sentence to the class:

* | have made up my mind to work harder. (9 words)
This sentence can be summarized as follows:

* |have decided to work harder. (6 words)

Note that these two sentences mean exactly the same.

Summarize the sentences on the next page by replacing the underlined phrases
with the verbs in the box below.:

ao tents rece ena eure a tnerenene es a ne en eee prmnema ae stamnesmr ne 1 sneer meee

bleeding | gossip postponed argued deceive avoided jogging
summarize increased cooperate



--- Page 78 ---
I. loften see that old man running for exercise at a slow and steady speed. :

2. People who work together with others in order to achieve something usually
succeed.

3. At the end of the meeting, | was asked to say in a few words the decisions we
had made.

4. | listened while the two brothers discussed in an angry way something that.they

disagreed about.

5. If all motorists were careful drivers, many road accidents could be prevented
from happening.

6. The girl fainted as a result of losing a lot of blood.

7. People who behave in a dishonest way and trick others are harmful to the

society in which they live.
8. | do not like people who talk about other people’ rivate lives.
?. The number of motor-cars on our roads has become bigger and bigger.
1

0. Because only a few people turned up, the meeting was not held on the day it
had been planned; but was going to be held at a later time.

The verbs in brackets are all written in the present tense. Rewrite the following i”
composition changing all the verbs in brackets to the past tense. :

The two families

Give a person food and that Person will live for a day, teach the person to grow
food crops and that person will live for a long time. Here is a legend, an imaginary
story about imaginary People and events in the past, that sums up this wise saying.

or
wn
a
fe)
aD
a)
@
wn
>
fe)
zB.
a)
a
o
im}
+
>
0)
=p
C.
g
0)
wn
xe}
Ww
0,
Q
<
=
a>
(0)
S
—
>
a)
é
a
fey
0)
fe)
fe}
3
oD
nn
9)
Q
0
~o

One day, Marindo and his wife (leaves) their home and (go). out searching for |
fruits. After a long walk through the forest the two (come) to an‘open area that |
(is) surrounded by logs and thorn branches. They (look) into the area. On one side
they (see) fruit trees with lots of fruits. Some crops (grow) on the other side where
aman and his wife, both with hoes (are) busy cultivating the land.

0 and his wife (are) hungry.
milies (have) a good dinner


--- Page 79 ---
together. After eating, Simango and his wife (listen) quietly as Mr and Mrs Marindo
(speak) to them about their long walk in search of wild fruits.

Then Mr and Mrs Simango (think) of a wise plan. They (teach) the Marindos how
to grow food crops. Afterwards they (give) the Marindos some seeds fo sow when
they (get) back to their home. Happily, the Marindos (fake) the seeds and the
knowledge they had (gain) back to their home.

When they (arrive) home, Marindo and his wife (prepare) a piece of land. Then
they (begin) to grow their own food crops. Their crops (grow) well and (give) them
a bumper harvest. From then on, Marindo and his wife (do) not stop growing
food crops and they never (go) hungry even when the wild fruits ran out.

ty



--- Page 80 ---
mi)

Take turns to read the poem below aloud. Take note of the -ire words. Learn to
recite the poem.

| aspire

| aspire to inspire,

Other people to admire,
People like the farmer | admire.
He did not tire to call,

The firefighters required,

To put out the big fire,

That was going to set on fire,
His entire farm.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

Have you ever been very tired before? What had you been doing?

What do you aspire to do in life?

What is the name of the persori who inspires you the most?

Give examples of things that expire.
Who is one person you admire and what do you admire him/her for?

Tell the class about someone who hired something, and to do what. -

Say one or two things that you equire to do something. :

What were you doing the last time you perspired?

Nii .

ONAaAKRWHNH —

Read this story and answer the questions that follow:

Bhande and Dondo

completion earnings nursery seedlings

orchard

inquire construct purchased delivery prosperous



--- Page 81 ---
A prosperous farmer, Mrs Murindi, hired two men, Bhande and Dondo to construct
a firebreak round the farmhouse. The well-to-do farmer promised to pay each
man eighty dollars on completion of the job. For days, the two men perspired
in the hot sun, constructing the firebreak. It was a narrow strip of land which was
cleared of the grass, trees and bushes to prevent fire from spreading from one
side to the other. When the job was completed, Mrs Murindi was so pleased that
she paid each man twenty dollars more.

Dondo spent almost all of his earnings on a new bicycle. He had always aspired
to have.a bicycle to.ride to the shops. For a long time, Dondo had admired other
villagers doing that. Now, he had the money required for a new bicycle. He did
not even Inquire if a similar bicycle could be bought at a lower price in other
shops. -

Bhande, on the other hand did not require a bicycle at that moment. Instead he
went.to the nursery where he purchased fruit tree seedlings that cost him forty
dollars in total. Then, with the remainder he bought a wire fence. With these,
Bhande started an orchard round which he erected the wire fence. There he
planted the. tree seedlings that he had acquired from the nursery. With the wire
fence round the entire orchard the trees were well-protected against the village
cattle, goats, sheep and donkeys. They grew well and quickly.

After five years, Bhande was getting a lot of fruits for his family and for sale. From
the sale of the fruits, Bhande got a lot of money. When the fruits for sale increased,
Bhande bought a delivery bicycle to carry the fruits to the market before they
expired.

Meanwhile, Dondo's bicycle was ageing and ageing with time and use. Eventually
the bicycle broke down altogether. That is when Dondo begged Bhande to hire
him as a delivery man for his fruits.



--- Page 82 ---
Answer these questions in full, correct sentences:

1. What is a firebreak?

How much money did Madam Murindi pay the two men?.

Why did Madam Murindi pay each man twenty dollars more?

What does it mean to say that Dondo spent almost all his earnings on-a new
bicycle?

Why did Dondo decide to buy a bicycle?

In this story, what is a nursery?

What did Bhande buy with his money? .

Who of the two, Dondo or Bhande used his money wisely?

BFWN

CON XM

Read these sentences aloud:

1. The rich farmer was so pleased that he paid each man twenty dollars more.
2. The box was so heavy that! could not lift it.

3. It is so hot that we cannot play any games outside.

Now say your own sentences using so.. that

First, look at the second paragraph in the story of Bhande and Dondo. Afterwards
the teacher will read out that paragraph while you write it neatly but quickly.

¥
4

Example: If | were you, | would do my homework well.

(i) A short question Gad dnswer game to play in pairs: ,
Learner A asks: What would you do if you were a rich farmer?
Learner B answers: If | were a rich farmer | would

Then learner B asks while learner A answers. Note that we use were (not was),
because of the word you. .

(ii) Take turns to answer this question, one by one:
What would you do if you had a lot of money?
Say: If |had a lot of money, | would



--- Page 83 ---
vrming nouns with -sion

Example: The man made a wise decision to keep his money in the bank.
The word decision is a noun formed from the verb decide.

Using -sion in the same way, réwrite the following sentences with the nouns
formed from the verbs in the brackets, then say the new sentences correcily.
Soil (erode) is the washing away of soil by running water or wind.

There was a head-on (collide) of a car ancl a bus on the highway.

The green crops were all destroyed during an (invade) by locusts.

There is good (divide) of labour in our family.

The matron thanked the mayor for the (provide) of blankets to the hospital.
He was a lonely boy before his (persuade) to join the sports club.

The (include) of women in the police force has improved the police service.
His (exclude) from sports was the punishment for his disobedience.

CONAUORWN>

J) WES TRecsicayys

In life,, some people make wise decisions:

Example:

¢ how they spend their money or time .

how they spend the weekends or the holidays

the people they choose as their friends

what to do when faced with a challenge or a problem
how to save money ,
when to do certain things

¢ staying safe.

Under the heading A_wise decision write a composition about someone who
made a wise decision. Write the composition in 80 — 120 words.

ead and write — |

Read the paragraph on the next page choosing the correct word from the

brackets.

Vnuutanas ~aeppeeccecesneienes re teree aemnmenmammnnetn es tetete SEAMEN A SeEERCnemaer awe semmnanE ey Hgemmt | smmencrmm camueseeeener eS SATS © ween cenit ee me ee



--- Page 84 ---
Saat eee ean eeeineinmeieteenemtentaE
'

"From my bedroom window !

While sitting in my bedroom, | (herd/heard) a low noise outside. When | looked |
(through/threw) the window, | (sew/saw) (hour/our) house (made/maid).She .
was wearing her long (caught/coat) while standing behind the (raws/rows) of;
flowers near the corner of the house. She had picked a big (flour/flower) which |
she was smelling and enjoying its (cent/scent). When | (cold/called) out her
name she turned around in surprise. Then | (knew/new) that she had not seen
me.

‘ From the passage above, answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

. Where was the writer sitting?

Who did the writer see when he looked outside?

. What was the person the writer saw outside wearing?

. Where was the person outside standing?

. When did the person standing outside turn around in surprise?

. What was the person standing outside doing?

. How did the writer get to know that there was someone standing outside?

N&OORWN —

3 end dictation
Listen carefully as the teacher dictates the paragraph: From my bedroom window
and you write it using the correct words from the brackets.

Choose any two of the sentence beginnings below. Say one correct sentence |
with each one of the beginnings you have chosen:
; 1. Two days/A fortnight ago
. Last week/month/year
. Once upon atime
. Yesterday ,.
. During the last hdlida

°
ee

GO B Gh

Sih rary

Read the story: Bhande and Dondo again. Write a summary of the story. Your |
summary should be in 30-40 words. _

ToS Semramensgccmame eens er erences Aereaen eaten reat tema a ae BLA SIM ek te eee ee a



--- Page 85 ---
Sakhile talks with Zanele and Bongani
Read this bepnversation in groups of four: the narrator, Zanele, Sakhile and Bongani.

twins , warden excited protect protection permission
ivory Poisonous courts cubs beret khaki
Narrator:

Mr and Mrs Homela have three children. Sakhile, their oldest child, is now twenty-
two years old. She is a game warden at Gona-re-Zhou National Park, in south-east
Zimbabwe. Mr and Mrs Homela have twin children, Zanele and Bongani.

In early June, Sakhile took leave from her work and came home. That was her first
visit home after training as a game warden and taking up the new job. Zanele and
Bongani were excited to see their sister dressed in the game wardens' khaki uniform,
complete with a green beret on her head. The twins wasted no time before talking
to their elder sister.

Zanele: Please Sakhile, tell us all about your job as a game warden.

Sakhile: My job as a game warden is to protect the wild animals that are in the
national parks. | also see to it that the rules of our national parks are obeyed
and followed.

Bongani: Do wild animals need any protection at all? | always thought that the wild
animals protect themselves. Besides, are wild animals not there for us to
kill as and when we want their meat?

Sakhile: Wild animals need protection, for example, against poachers. These are

people who hunt and kill the wild animals without permission. Poachers
kill elephants for their tusks that are used for ivory. They kill the rhino to get
the rhino horn which fetches a lot of money on the black market. Some
poachers also kill the wild animals for meat.

Zanele: Do you also protect wild animals like lions, buffalos, crocodiles and snakes.

- These are dangerous animals that should not be protected at all.

Sakhile: As gameswardens we, give protection to all the wild animals including
the ones you have mentioned. Besides, animals like lions, buffalos and
snakes usually attack people only in self-defence. A lioness with cubs will
attack people to protect its young ones. An elephant or a buffalo with a
calf or calves will do the same. As for snakes, they never go out to attack

aa

bi bib 5 ae



--- Page 86 ---
People, but will bite people in self-defence. Besides, some snakes, like the
python are not poisonous.
Bongani: So what would you do toa poacher you find in the national parks? Do you
just tell him or her not to kill the wild animals?
Sakhile: Ohl! If we come across any poachers, we arrest them and take them to Q
court of law just like a thief is arrested bythe police. .
Zanele: But arresting people is the job of the police. Are game wardens members
of the police force?
Sakhile: No and yes! Game wardens are not members of the police force, but we
assist the police to enforce the laws of the country in the national parks.
You too can, and should assist the police in the fight against crime and
criminals.
Bongani: But there are no poachers here because there are hardly any wild animals
left. People here have killed nearly all the wild animals for meat.
Sakhile: There are poachers everywhere! There are firewood poachers, fish
poachers, thatching grass poachers, stone poachers and sand poachers.
One is a poacher as long as one gets these things without permission,

Choose the. correct answer.

1. Zanele was Bongani.
A. older than B. asoldas
C. younger than D. also called
2. Sakhile was still single. This means that she was .
A. living alone B. a well-trained game ranger
C. amaried woman D. not yet married
3. Poaching is a like stealing.
A. hobby B. job . ©. danger D. crime
4. Someone who kills animals or catches fish without permission is called a
A. thief B. poacher C. robber D. murderer
S. How old will Zanele and Bongani be on their next birthday?
A. Ten years. B. Eleven years.
C. Twenty-three years D. Twenty-two years.
6. Complete this sentence: A lioness isa lion.

A. cub B. female Cc. male D. dangerous
7. This story encourages people _ ;
A. to kill wild animals for meat
B. tohelp the police in the fight against crime
C. not to help the police in the fight against crime
D. to protect themselves against wild animals-
8. According to this story. ,
A. all snakes are poisonous
B. pythons are very Poisonous snakes
C. all snakes are not dangerous to people
D. not all snakes are poisonous .



--- Page 87 ---
Choose the correct preposition to complete each sentence.

I. In early June, Sakhile took leave _— her work. (of/from/off)

2. His decision to jump : the fence was not a wise one. (on/under over)
3. The heavy rain prevented us going out fishing. (to/from/for)

4. The young man spent some of his money new clothes. (with/of/ on)

8. The catwas running a big rat. (after/onto/with)
6.
7
8

Every morning, many learners go to school foot. (by/with/on)
. She learned the poem heart so that she could recite it. (with/in/by)
. |look forward Visiting the Victoria Falls one day. (on/to/for)

| congratulate’ you Passing the examination. (to/of/on)

9.
10. Always look __| the people you are speaking to. (to/at/on)

Wherever there is wr- the w- is silent.

Read the poem below. Learn to recite it.

My uncle

My very old, old uncle,

Wrinkled and wretched

With just a thin wrap around on:
Was once a feared wrestler
Who wrecked his opponents,
Or wrenched their wrists

As they tried to wriggle

Out of his powerful wrists

In the sport of wrestling.

Say the - words in the left column below taken from the poem above. Their
meanings are given on the right, but they are mixed up. From the way the words
are used in the poem, try to match each word on the left to its correct meaning on

the right.
wrap around .......... destroyed or damaged in a bad way
WriQGle...........424 G@ Very bad condition
wrecked



--- Page 88 ---
pb

WIENCN .....csceeeeesenees a loose cloth that one puts on round the body

WYESTIING ......:eceeeeeee to injure a part of the body like the arm by twisting it
WIetCNed.......ecesseeees the part that joins the hand to the arm
WTINKIED .o....seeeeeeceees a sport in which the players hold, push, and throw one another

to move the Eody by twisting and turning quickly

Example: A game warden protects wild animals.

(a) Find out what the following people do: ; .
plumber pilot optician mechanic. dentist journalist cobbler principal
librarian bursar mayor author butcher surgeon vendor poet

(6b) What would you like to be when you grow Up?
Say: When | grow up, | would like to be a

Wane
We use the apostrophe’ to show ownership or possession when the noun ends with s.
Look at these examples: .
(a) These are the hostels of the boys.
These are the boys’ hostels.
(6) That is the car of Mr Jones.
That is Mr Jones’ car.

Note the position of the apostrophe when the noun ends with s.

Rewrite these sentences using the apostrophe to show possession.
1. The heavy rains damaged the crops of the farmers.

The parents of these boys are all here.

This shop sells clothes for girls.

The prince is the twin brother of the princess.

Peter is a friend of Jonas.

When is the Day of the Mothers?

That girl looks like the sister of Charles.

The government pays the salaries of the civil servants.

CNA OR WHY

In groups of 35 - 45, prepare and then hold a conversation about the events



--- Page 89 ---
nappening in your area while the rest of the class listens. The conversation can
include sports, the weather, weddings, deaths, ceremonies, jobs, accidents,
important visits, natural disasters, what is on the news, etc.

hp o letter

Imagine that you are Sakhile, the new game ranger in the conversation that you
read at the beginning of this unit. Write an informal letter to a friend telling him/her
about your new job. The body of your letter should be 80 — 100 words in length.

In the letter, say something about:

¢ what you always wanted to become when you were still at school

the training you went through, and how long it was

the new job, and where you are stationed

the challenges you face in the job

whether or not you are enjoying the job.

“che suminary of a dismugsion

Read again the discussion that Sakhile had with Zanele and Bongani in: Sakhile
talks with Zanele and Bongani. Then, using the guidelines below, write a summary
of that discussion in 30 words:

¢ who Sakhile was

e what she did in her job

¢ what she told her little sister, Zanele and brother, Bongani about the poachers
* what she also told them about wild animais, including. snakes.

-——



--- Page 90 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about a quiz and answer the questions that
follow. )

A quiz is a test or a competition in which you answer questions. People can hold a
quiz session as individuals or in groups that compete. People or groups of people
in a quiz score points when they answer the questions correctly. At the end of the
quiz, the individual or the group with the highest number of points is the winner.

Answer these questions:

What is a quiz?

How can people hold a quiz session?

Who becomes the winner in a quiz session?

Do you think holding a quiz session helps the learners like you and how?
How would you prepare yourself for a quiz?

aRWN >

Read the passage and answer the questions that follow.

The Radio quiz

On Tuesday the fifth of June 2018, there v was a science radio- -telephone quiz for
children under the age of twelve. .

The science, multiple choice question was:

In which part of the #ree is the plant food made?
A. Inthe flowers of the tree.
B. Inthe roots of the tree.
C. In the leaves of the tree. -
D. In the fruits of the tree.



--- Page 91 ---
eaale = ase

The first respondent who called said, “My name is George Mlambo. | am eleven
years old, and | am in Grade Five at Hippo Valley Primary School in Chiredzi. The
answer is in B because the roots grow in the soil where people also grow their
food crops.”

The second respondent called and said, “My name is Tabeth Ngwenya. | am
eight years old, and | am in Grade Three at Marula Primary School in Plumtree.
The answer is in D because the fruits are the food we eat.”

The third respondent said, “My name is Eric Ndou. | am nine years old, and lamin
Grade Four at Dulibadzimu Primary School in Beitbridge. | say the answer isin Cc.
The leaves use the sunlight to make the plant food.”

The fourth respondent called and said, “My name is Rosemary Mabika. | am ten
years old, and | am in Grade Five at Nyautare Primary School in Nyanga. The
answer is in A because the bees make honey from the pollen and nectar which
they collect from the flowers.”

The fifth respondent said, “My name is Salome Munkuli. | am twelve years old,
and | am in Grade Six at Binga Primary School in Binga. The answer is in C."

The radio quiz master then said, “Thank you children for entering the radio quiz
competition. We have two winners for this science quiz. They are Rosemary Ndou
and Salome Munkuli. The correct answer is in C. Plant food is made in the leaves
of the tree. | will be sending fifty dollars by mobile money transfer to each of
our two winners. [wish to thank all the participants for trying and everyone for
listening to the radio quiz. Tune in at the same time, same day next week for the
next science radio quiz. Good-bye for now!"

Fe a te.



--- Page 92 ---
Answer the following questions in full, correct sentences.

In which part of the plant is the plant food made? ,

Who was the youngest of the participants in the radio quiz?

Who was the oldest of the participants in the radio quiz?

To whom is the name ‘respondents’ referring in the passage?

Why did Tabeth Ngwenya think that the plant food is made in the fruits of the

plant? ;

Who of the participants thought that the plant food is made in the roots of the

plant?

7. Why did Rosemary Mabika think that the plant food is made in the flowers, of
the plant?

8. How much prize money did the quiz master pay out altogether?

9. According to this Passage, was the science radio quiz a daily, weekly, monthly,
seasonal or annual event?

10. Was this radio quiz a district, regional, or national quiz?

ORWN>

o&

You are going to hold a group quiz session. Below are some of the questions that
you will be asked.

Using the internet, the Newspape’s, and other people prepare for the quiz by
looking for the answers to these questions. The questions will be asked in any order
and you just have to be ready to answer them as they come:

(a) Questions on some of the famous places in Zimbabwe:

1. What is the name of the highest mountain peak in Zimbabwe?
What is the name of the international airport in Bulawayo?
Which place is sometimes referred to as Mosi-oa-tunya?
What is the name of the big bridge which goes over the Save River between
Masvingo and Mutare? ; ;
Which city in Zimbabwe is known as the (a) Sunshine City? (b) City of Kings?
Name the five countries that surround our country, Zimbabwe.
What is the famous tourist attraction just outside the city of Chinhoyi?
What is the name of the big game reserve in the south-eastern border
of Zimbabwe with Mozambique and South Africa?

ON

CON AM

(b) Questions on some of the famous people and events of Zimbabwe:
1, What are the full names of the president of Zimbabwe?
2. What are the colours on the Zimbabwe National Flag and what do they
stand for?



--- Page 93 ---
3. Who in the government of Zimbabwe is the current minister in charge of:
(a) primary education
(6) health
(c) finance
(d) sports
: (d) the environment?
4. Who in the history of Zimbabwe was:
© (a) Lobengula’
(b) Josiah.Tongogara
(c) Jairos Jiri
(d) Sally Mugabe?
5: Who is Zimbabwe's current:
(a) Soccer Star
(b) Sportsperson of the Year?

(c) Questions on Zimbabwe's crops and natural resources:

Which crop is sometimes referred to as the ‘golden leaf'?

Which animal is sometimes referred to as the ‘king of the jungle’?

From which crop do we get the ethanol that is mixed with petrol?

What is the water stored in (a) Lake Kariba (b) Lake Mutirikwi used for?
Name one place where these minerals are mined: (a) platinum (b) coal.
Which of these crops: maize, potatoes and wheat is a root crop?

In which part of the plant is plant food made?

What is the washing away of soil by running water or wind called?

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Imagine that the statements below are the answers you got after asking someone
questions. Write the questions you asked beginning with the word at the end of
each statement.

Example: | have not seen your goats. (Have you seen my goats?)

1. [have never been to the Matobo Hills. (Have ?

2. The University of Zimbabwe is in Harare. (Where ?)

3. |was in the bus that broke down. (Where _ ?)

4. My father cooks for us when my mother is away. (Who ____?)

5. He makes money by selling vegetables. (How ?)

6. It started raining after midnight. (When ___ ?)

7. We did not see any poachers in the game reserve. (Did____?)
8. Today is a Friday. (What 2)

9. My mother camnot drive a car. (Can ?)

l

0. Jane is the pastor's daughter. (Whose ?)



--- Page 94 ---
ze?
PPR te) eet Spa ese ms ca
we tedd Gwe P48 re Hie

Listen carefully and say this sentence correctly after your teacher:
A diagonal line divides the rectangle into two equal triangles.

Say the following words correctly:

diary _ bias diarrhoea diagram dialogue
triathlon dialect viable reliable diaphram

diamonds diameter diagonal triangle diabetes

Example: That lady is smart, isn’t she?
Note: isn’t is the short of the joined is not, where the o is replaced with’.

Other examples:

* Those two boys are good friends, aren't they?
* Jacob was present at the meeting, wasn't he?
Note: We add question tags at the end of sentences to change them to questions.
We use the helping verbs in the box to make these question endings.

is was were are has have do
did can could will (won't) —. would should does

Ane et A NR ree Ree ne en eee Ree samen ee

Using the right helping verb from the box above, say the right question endings to
the following statements:

James does his homework well.

The boys were nofate again.

They could look after themselves.

Father allowed us to go out to play.

You will come to my birthday party.

You know my name.

James was very polite to the visitors.

You have come to work for Mrs Goto.

CONAOR WN >

In the same way, write your own five questions with the right question tags.



--- Page 95 ---
Ny 7g CQi@Ccives Oy Maa -Pe ro VE :

Example: The attractive flowers always attract insects like bees.

Note that we have added -ive to the verb attract to form the adjective attractive.

Another example: -
* One must be very creative to be able to create funny stories like that.

Note that when the verb ends with « we drop the = then add -iv= to form the
adjective. Say the sentences below correctly with the adjective formed from the
word in brackets. —

Children like to-be (act) all the time.

We have planted some (decorate) plants round the house.

When spraying crops, one must wear (protect) clothing.

People must not use (abuse) language on the phone.

The fruit trees in the orchard are still (product) and should not be cut.

The teacher was wearing an (expense) suit. .

Some people are very (secret) in what they do.

The husband is very (possess) of his young wife.

CSONAANRWN >

‘Read this paragraph quickly and fluently to the teacher. —
The old man and the thief

One day'I was watching a film on television. An old man with only a wrap

~ around on his body was taking a walk. On his finger, he had an expensive ring.
Then a thief came along. He pinned the old man down like a wrestler and
twisted the old man's finger which had the ring. Writhing in pain, the old man
wriggled and freed himself before shouting for help. That is when the thief ran
away, empty-handed.

: Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
1. What was the old man wearing on his body?

2, What was the old man doing when the thief came along?



--- Page 96 ---
. How did the old man free himself?
. Did the thief manage to take the old man's ring?
Who was writhing in pain?
. Do you think the old man was strong or weak? Give a reason.

. What does it mean to say the thief ran away ‘empty-handed’?

be nae Sia, |
a Gat az \

incurs ceteteeeaniieeeenen ae

NOMA

Complete these statements with the right question tags.

. Your friends have always stood by you, ?

. You would think that he is a poor man, ?

. Surely, you do know my name, ? .
. That girl has worked hard throughout the term, ?
We are very obedient learners, ?
Today's weather is not fine, __ ?

. We should be helpful to one another, ?

. You surely can not make tea for yourself, ?

ONAMORWHY—

Your teacher will read out the paragraph: The old man and the thief while you
write it quickly and in good handwriting.

, : a
a] am ow v ~ P
aN ver 3¢ Pr egae ea

By answering the questions: who, what, where, how and which, write a composition :
under the heading: My best friend. Your composition should be 80 — 120 words in '
length. In your composition say:

* who your friend is, how old he/she is, whether it is a boy/girl, what he/she looks
like '

* where he/she lives? whom he/she lives with

* when you became friends, how you became friends and why he/she is your .
best friend .

° what his/her likes and dislikes are . .

* what you do together, the garnes you play, where you play, how often you
play |

* what people say/think about your friendship.



--- Page 97 ---
T

ake turns to read this poem aloud. Answer the questions that follow. Learn to recite

the poem.

Our environment

Our environment is our heritage.
The environment,

Is the natural world.

The land and the water on it.
The air and the animals.

The plants and the people.

To save our environment,
We must:

Prevent the erosion of soil,
Prevent siltation,

Prevent pollution,

Prevent deforestation,

| Prevent veld fires and

Prevent the killing of animals.

ee

Match each word on the left with the correct meaning from the column on the right.

aAaRWND

Prevent..............00 the damaging of the environment.

Erosion ................045 the filling of the rivers with small stones and sand.
Deforestation ........ to stop something from happening. .
Pollution................. a big fire that destroys the environment.

Siltation .............06 the cutting down and removing of trees in large areas.

Veld fire ............... the washing away of soil by wind and running water.



--- Page 98 ---
°°

Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

The destroyed environment
twin rural modern community tapped her
Pastures livestock environment destroyed desolate destruction
difficult herd

wondered children hungry shocked

Sarah and her twin brother Peter are in Grade Five at Mathema Primary School.
It is in the rural area. Mathema is a modern school with electricity and tapped
water. The community has worked hard to make Mathema a modern school for
its children.

After school, Sarah and Peter help their parents at home. They clean the house
and the yard. They wash the pots and the Plates together. Sarah and Peter mostly
enjoy herding the family cattle in the pastures. There, they meet other boys and
girls .of their age, also with their livestock. Together they play games such as hide-
and-seek or they pick wild fruits while their cattle graze.

z

-

One day, while still at school, the children saw dark smoke rising into the sky. The
smoke was far away so nobody really wondered what had caused it. Then, after
school, Sarah and Peter rushed home to assist their parents as usual. When they
got home, their father asked them to drive the cattle to the pastures.



--- Page 99 ---
When they got to the pastures, Sarah and Peter were shocked. A big veld fire
had burnt all the grass and destroyed the trees. There was no grass left for their
cattle. There were no fruits to pick from the trees. The whole area was desolate.

Then, they remembered they had seen dark smoke rising into the sky while they
were still at school. The children were very sad. They did not know who or what
had started the veld fire. All they could see now was a total destruction of the
environment. So they returned home with the hungry cattle and told their parents
what they had seen. The parents too were shocked by what their children were
telling them. With the grass in the pastures burnt to ashes, it was going to be very
difficult for all the people to keep their livestock alive.

Answer the questions below in full, correct sentences.

What does it mean to say that Peter was Sarah's twin brother?

What shows that Mathema was a modern school?

Who had made Mathema a modern school and how?

ls cleaning pots and plates girls’ or boys’ work?

Would you say that Sarah and Peter were good children? Why?

What did Sarah and Peter enjoy doing most after school?

Why had nobody wondered what had caused the dark smoke rising into the
sky?

8. What shocked Sarah and Peter in this story?

9. Why was it going to be difficult for alll the people to keep their livestock alive?
10. What do we learn from this story?

NOOR WN >

VEY TeESsOaess

Look at this example:

During morning Sssembly at Veza School, the headmaster made the following
announcement to all the learners: “Tell your parents to come for a meeting here at
the school at ten o'clock next Friday morning.”

This is how the learners should convey the headmaster’s message to their parents:
“The headmaster is inviting you to a meeting at the school at ten o'clock next
Friday morning.”

Convey the following messages correctly:
1. “lwould like to be a pilot when | grow up,” said James.



--- Page 100 ---
“Please show me the way to the police stcition,” the old man asked me.

“Do not cross flooded rivers,” the teacher told the learners.

“Put on bright clothes when you walk on the road at night," the policeman

advised the boys.

9. “People who burn grass and cut down trees must be punished," the people at
the meeting agreed. .

6. "The elections:will be held in the month of May,” the president announced on
radio and television.

7, “Please call all the learners into the Classroom,” the teacher told Anna.

8. “Come and pull me out of this hole,” the trapped miner shouted to the people

Passing by.

WN

"or and -sion

Read the poem below. Note that -tion and -sion say shen.

Where | grew up

| grew up ata mission station with a small population,
In the centre of a large plantation spreading out in all directions,

Jnder irrigation and surrounded by a high fence for protection.

Famous for its crop rotation, food production and ever-green vegetation,
The plantation around the mission station was no place for recreation.

To pass through the plantation without being asked questions,

One needed written permission from the mission station.

Answer these questions in full sentences.

Where did the writer grow Up?

Where was the mission station?

Were there many people living at the mission station?

What was the high fence for?

What was the plantation famous for?

What was needed for one to pass through the plantation?

Would you say that the plantation was a small one or a large one?
What do you understand by ‘crop rotation'?

1.
2.
3.
4.
QS.
6.
7.
8.

In a debate, some people speak in support of a topic while others oppose it. You
support or oppose the topic by giving good reasons. In two groups, hold a debate



--- Page 101 ---
i ee

“TA KUbAWw A Cn UrUoA

on any of the following topics:
¢ Should people burn or bury household waste?
* Mining should be stopped beccuse it destroys the environment.

Listen carefully as your teacher reads to you the process of starting your own poultry
project.

Starting a home poultry project

Raising chickens at home can be a hobby as well as a source of food and income.
Basically, there are two types of poultry orojects: for meat or for eggs. Here are the
steps in starting your own pouliry project at home:

* Decide on your poultry project: raising chickens for meat or for eggs. If you
choose to do both at the same time make separate shelters for each.

* Build a secure shelter which should be warm but not hot and dry. It should be
dust-free. The shelter should also have good lighting to enable. the young
chickens to feed throughout the day if need be.

¢ Buy or get chicks from a good supplier known for supplying good breeds.

* Stockon the right feeds for your chickens. Good feeds are necessary for healthy
chickens.

* Provide the chickens with clean drinking water all the time and keep changing
the water.

* Keep the chicken shelter clean all the time and do not let the chickens eat or
lie on their droppings. Keep changing the bedding.

¢: Keep an eye on the growth of the chickens and prevent diseases or insects
such as fleas from affecting the health of your chickens. If necessary get advice |
from the experts in your area. : .

* If you have layers, provide good nests where they can drop the eggs when

they start laying. ;

Answer the fotlowing questions in full, correct sentences.

Why is poultry-keeping important to people?

Which are the two basic types of poultry projects?

What is income?

What must one do if one decides to keep both types of chickens?
How would you describe a good chicken shelter?

What is necessary for the growth of healthy chickens?

To keep an eye on something is to .

Which insects can affect the health of the chickens?

ANAM RWN >



--- Page 102 ---
Listen carefully and say this sentence correctly after your teacher:
* The mayor of this city is a senior doctor and bachelor.

Did you hear the sound of -or at the end of the words mayor, senior, doctor, bachelor
and that the -r is silent?
(i) Now say the following words correctly:

author creator director donor editor governor
emperor instructor inspector — junior professor survivor
vendor visitor sponsor senator motor debtor
tutor _ minor invigilator curator ~ sailor

(ii) Using the dictionary, or the internet or any other books, find out what the people
with the names listed in (i) above do or are and tell the class.

The two pictures below tell a story. Write a composition about that story under
a suitable heading. The composition should be in 80 — 120 words. Give your
composition a good heading.

Here are some words and phrases that you may use in your composition:

* one sunny day there wasa___ * destroying the trees and the grass
* started by ___ * put out the fire using

* people gathered and agreed to___ ¢ thick smoke rising into the sky

* a strong wind was blowing from the ______*_ the lesson learnt was that_

¢ the lesson learnt was that



--- Page 103 ---
English Paper 1

Time: | hour 30 minutes (Total marks: 40)

Read the passage below and answer the questions below.

Leisure aciivities and hobbies

People have different things they enjoy doing when they are not working. For
me, fishing is the hobby | enjoy most. | could be out fishing for the whole day
without finding it boring or tiresome.

One day | was sitting on an anthill beside a river, fishing. | remember hearing
the distant rumble of thunder and | knew that it was raining somewhere. That
did not worry me for as long as it was not raining on me. | was also catching so
many fish that | did not notice the rising water level in the river.

Then, when | looked behind, | noticed that the water would surround the
ant-hill on which | was sitting. | quickly stopped fishing and hurried home.

When | was out of danger. | suddenly realised that in my hurry, | had left all the
fish |had caught on the anthill. |, however, could not go back to the anthill as
the water level was still rising. | also realised that the river was flowing from an
area where it was raining.

1. Ahobby is something that

A. is boring and tiresome

B. onedoesnhotnotice -°

C. you enjoy doing in your free time
D. you do without thinking

2. This story says that .

A. most people do not have hobbies
B. fishing is a dangerous hobby

C. people have different hobbies
D



--- Page 104 ---
3. How did he know that if was raining somewhere?
A. The water level in the river was rising.
B. He heard the rumble of thunder.
C. The river was flowing.
D. He was surrounded by water.
4. Why did he not worry when he heard the rumble of thunder?
A. He was enjoying the fishing.
B. The water level was not rising.
C. He was catching many fish.
D. It was not-raining on him.
5. Why did he not notice that the water level in the river was rising?
A. He was enjoying the. fishing.
B. It was boring and tiresome.
C. He was sitting on an anthill.
D. The water level was not rising.
6. What did the writer do when he noticed the anthill would be surrounded by
water?
A. He jumped into the river.
B. He continued fishing.
C. He started crying.
D. He rushed home.
7. Why was it too late to go back to the anthill to collect his fish?
A. The water level was rising.
B. It was raining.
C. He was in.a hurry to go home.
D. He was very tired.
8. Which of these statements is true?
A. He did not catch any fish. .
B. He went back home with no fish.
C. He went back home with many fish.
D. He drowned in the water.

Choose the right name to complete the sentence.

9. A _ is a book in which one writes one's everyday experiences.
A. diary B. newspaper C. magazine D. storybook
10. People who visit places on holiday are known as
A. visitors B. tourists C. travellers D. strangers
11. A piece of land that is surrounded by water is known as
A. a hill B. alake C. anisland D. a valley
12.A is a period of two weeks.
A. week B. holiday C. long time D. fortnight

Choose the right verb to fill in the blank space.
13. The cattle that _» ' the polluted water died.
A. drink B. drinking C. drank D. drunk

ie Ae I



--- Page 105 ---
14, | did not go near him because | "Re was very angry with me.

A. think B. thought © C. thinking D. thinks
15. When | greeted her, |_ ___-_ not know who she was.
A. do B. doing C. does D. did
16. | did not hear what he said because he in a very low voice.
A. spoke B. sooken C. speak D. speaking
Choose the correct word to complete the sentence.
17. Vendors are people who things outside the shops.
A. sell B. sail ‘Cc. cell D. sale
18. | got some flower seeds io ____ in the garden.
A. SAW B. sew C. so D. sow
19. Madam Moyo is our new schoo! .
A. herd B. head Cc. had D. heard
20. The sun always sets in the LO
A. worst B. west C. waste D. waist

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.
Rules

My parents continue to make rules for me. Most of the rules are because of the
mistakes | make. One of the rules is to keep my school socks tied together in
odirs. This is because | always failed to find one of the socks whenever | dressed
up for school. Now | keep my school socks tied together in pairs with rubber
bands.

Another rule that my mother gave me is to tidy up my bedroom every morning.
If | do not do so, the punishment is to tidy up My sisters’ bedroom as well the
following morning. | keep this rule religiously because if there is one thing | really
dislike, it is tidying up the girls’ bedroom. | never manage to do it as thoroughly
as the girls would like.

Praying before meals is another rule that | keep religiously. If | do not do that,
my mother gives me less food at the next meal. She says that food is a gift from
God; and only those who remember to thank for it through prayer get enough
of it. a

My father too made another rule for me never to go out with unkempt hair.
Now | keep one comb in the bathroom and another in my bedroom. This helps
me not to forget to comb my hair. If | forget, the punishment is to have my
head clean-shaven and my father knows that | hate going about with a bald
head.

There is also this rule that | may watch television only up to seven o'clock in the
evening. After that it is supper time followed by bedtime. Father says going



--- Page 106 ---
OT eeenernnn 2 erates eee att eens tenet ees ee ye TE ae nme ne cat arene oe g sneer:

to bed early ensures that | get enough rest to be ready for school the next
day. The punishment for breaking this rule is no television watching over the
next weekend. That is when the television shows my favourite sports which are
football and wrestling.

21. The writer now keeps his school socks together in pairs by
A. tying them together in pairs with rubber bands
B. keeping one in the bathroom and another in his bedroom
C. not making more mistakes
D. making rules
22. The punishment for not tidying his own bedroom every morning is
A. tidying only the girls’ bedroom the next morning
B. not watching television over the weekend
C. cleaning the bathroom
D. tidying the girls, bedroom in addition to his own

23. Why does he dislike tidying up the girls’ bedroom?

A. He does not sleep in the girls’ bedroorn.
B. The girls are able to tidy up their own bedroom.
C. He is not as thorough as the girls would like.
D. Tidying up the girls’ bedroom is not boys’ work.
24. He always remembers to pray before meals so that
A. mother gives him enough food at the next meal
B. God does not forget him
C. he gets more gifts from God
D. no new rules are made for him
25. When you see him with a clean-shaven head then you must know that he

A. was in a hurry to go to school

B. loved to keep his head clean-shaven
C. hated keeping a clean-shaven head
D. had gone out with unkempt hair

26. Why does he keep one comb in the bathroom and another in his bedroom?

A. To remind him to always comb his hair before going out.
B. He forgets to keep the two combs in one place.
C. So that there are not too many things in his bedroom.
D. So that his sisters do not take both combs away.
27. Why did father order him to watch television only up to seven o'clock and go
to bed early every evening?
A. So that there is less noise in the house.
B. So that he gets enough rest.
C. Watching television is bad for children.
D. The evenings are very short.
28. Do you think the writer keeps the rule to watch television Only up to
seven o'clock in the evenings and why?
A. No, because he does not want to go to bed early.



--- Page 107 ---
B. Yes, because he does not want to miss television over the weekend.
C. No, because there is football and wrestling after seven o'clock.
D. Yes, because he hates keeping a clean-shaven head.
29. This story shows that the writer's parents were giving him the rules because

A. they loved his sisters more than him

B. the family had too many children to look after

C. they wanted him to grow up well and do well in life
D. watching television is bad for children

Choose the word with the same meaning as the underlined word.
30. The man who had one car has purchased another, now he has two cars.

A. sold B. bought C. found © D. counted
31. Only two passengers were injured in that traffic accident.
A. hurt B. suffered © C. saved D. killed
32. All the athletes were perspiring after the race.
A. resting B. tired C. sweating D.competing
Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.
33. That is the man helped me yesterday.
A. whose B. which Cc. who D. whom
34. Although the place was a distance away, We went on foot.
A. there B. they C. their D. where
35. One must always take care of. .
A. himself B. themselves C. oneself D. yourself

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

36. That man is so rich that he can afford to buy clothes.
A. collective B. productive C. expensive D. supportive

37. The learners were alll as their teacher was teaching them.
A. exciting B. attentive C. possessive  D. suitable

Choose one word opposite in meaning to the underlined word. .
38. We watched our football team as they won the match.

‘A. played »=B.*drew  , C. lost D. enjoyed
39. Today | came early for school.
A. slowly B. late C. often | D. quickly

“40. In the word wrap which letter is silent?
A. p B.r C. w D. a



--- Page 108 ---
English Paper2

Time: | hour 45 minutes.

SECTION A COMPOSITION (20 MARKS)

You are advised to spend 1 hour on this section.
Answer either 1 or 2, but not both.

1. A friend has written a letter to you notifying you that he would like to visit YOu
on a certain day. Write a reply to your friend telling him/her that hé/she
should not come on that day. Your letter should be 80-120 words in length.
In your letter: — \ ;

* thank your friend for notifying you that he/she would be coming

* explain why your friend should not come on that day

* suggest or propose a new day for your friend to visit you

* suggest two things that you would like to do with your friend during
that visit.

2. Write a story about the day you felt proud of yourself. Your composition should
be 80-120 words in length. Use the following points and any other you may
think of to write your story:

* when it happened * where you were

* what happened * how it happened

* how you felt ¢ what other people did
SECTION B ' COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15 marks)

You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.
1) Comprehension (10 marks)

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.
The bicycle and the visit

| was excited when my mother bought a new bicycle. It was for me to ride
to school, so | thought. | got disappointed when my mother was riding the
° bicycle to work everyday.

Then the company for which my mother worked bought a staff bus to ferry
the workers to and from work daily. Therefore, | thought that my mother would
| now not need the bicycle. However, my mother still cycled to work. This, she
: said, kept her fit.

When there was a two-day public holiday, my mother let me use the bicycle.
| made a hurried decisionsto visit a friend without notifying her. | was sure that
my friend would enjoy taking a ride on the bicycle. It would be a pleasant

surprise for her.



--- Page 109 ---
eee oe anne one te Eg R se epeeneeemneecure se neenmvamanines nome

Off | went! | took the route past the homes of my classmates. | wanted them
to see me onmy bicycle. On the way | stopped now and again to chat to my
classmates. Sometimes | let them take a ride for short distances.

By the time | got to my friend's home, it was sunset. That did not worry me
because my plan was to stay there overnight. The gate was locked and the

doors and windows were all shut. Then, a neighbour's child told me that my
friend's family had travelled. | must say | learnt a big lesson that day.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

>

_ Why was the writer excited when her mother bought a new bicycle?
_ What disappointed the writer?
_ What did the writer think when the company that the mother worked for

bought a staff bus?

Why didthewriter's mothercontinue to cycletoworkevenwhen there was astaff

bus?

5. When did the writer’s mother let her use the bicycle?

6. Why did the writer take the long route to her friend's home?
7.
8
9
]

At what time did the writer arrive aft the friend's home?

_ Why was the writer not worried about arriving late at the friend's home?

What were the first signs that there was nobody at the friend's house?

0.What big lesson was learnt by the writer that day?

(ii) Summary (5 marks)

Imagine that a boy called Sam wrote the passage The bicycle and the visit |
above. In 30. words, and using the guidelines below, write a summary of what»

Sam wrote.

What excited Sam and why?
What disappointed Sam and why?
What happened when there was a two-day public holiday?

®

7~-
~~

———S


--- Page 110 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher reads the short story below to you and answer the
questions that follow.

People who have boasted

There was a builder who boasted that he was the best builder in the district.
The house that he built in the Village collapsed when there was a storm. There
was a motorist who boasted that he was the best driver in town. One day he
lost control of his car and hit a tree. There was a football team whose players
boasted that they were the best players in the league. Their team was beaten
by three goals to nil in the cup final match.

Answer these questions in full correct senteces.

What was the boastful builder saying about himself?

What happened to the house that he built in the village?
What was the boastful motorist saying about himself?

What happened to the motorist one day?

What were the boastful players saying about themselves?
What happened to their team in the cup final match?

How many goals did the boastful team score in the cup final?
Do you think boasting is good or bad?

¢ Gia? 9a ey ee as
* Y, easy Be NS Sa

Bes Bry Pere a
Es Theikte ete Be

PNAOKR WH

Complete the sentences below with the correct ending.

I. In sports, the person who trains the players is called the .
A. captain _ B. coach C. guard D. watchman

2. Someone whose job is to make sure that the players in a game obey the rules
of the game is called the

A. ruler B. leader C. referee D. policeman
3. Another name for the referee is ,
A. umpire - B. Owner C. pastor D. defender

4. People watching public events like sports are called .
A. players ~° B. audience C. spectators D. watchmen

~



--- Page 111 ---
A large building usually with a roof, where people can go to watch public
events like sports is called a ___

Oy

A. stadium _B. cinema Cc. hall D. venue
4. Aplayer who replaces another player of his own team during a sports game is
called a .
A. visitor B. substitute C. linesman D. striker
7. The-player who leads a team of players is called the
A. manager B. defender C. foreman D. captain
8. Someone who is good at sports and takes part in sports is called an
A. actor B. organizer C. instructor D. athlete
9. Inagame like football, tennis or rugby, there is one main referee and two
referees.
A. student B. junior C.learner — D. assistant
10. In sports, we say: _ makes perfect.

A. perhaps BB. practice — C. pride D. boasting

The boastful Mkonto

Until two years ago, Rukuni Village was a sleepy settlement of fifteen families in
the remote, rural south-eastern Zimbabwe, close to the banks of the big Save
River. That is where a man called Mkonto from one of the urban areas that he will
not disclose went to settle.



--- Page 112 ---
+ Ughhdte corheesagts

ORWN >

Mkonto is a boastful man. He claims to speak half a dozen languages. When
asked to prove it, Mkonto mumbles some strange words which no one in the
village understands. ,

Africa. That discouraged everyone from asking Mkonto any questions from the
Bible. The people knew that Mkonto would demand that the questions be asked
in Afrikaans, a language that none of the villagers could speak.

Mkonto also boasted that during his school days, he was always the best learner
in his class. Whenever asked which schools he went to, Mkonto mentions some
strange names which none of the villagers has ever heard about:

One rainy day when the Villagers were talking about floods, Mkonto boasted
that he was a very good swimmer. He said that he had won many swimming
competitions during his school days. While Mkonto was still talking, a woman
came running fast crying for help. She said that her only son got marooned on an
island by the rising waters of the flooding Save River while fishing.

The villagers quickly turned to Mkonto to Use his skills to rescue the marooned
boy. Seeing that he was now cornered the sly Mkonto refused saying, “I said that
| was a good swimmer. | did not say that I’m still a good swimmer. In fact, I'm now
too old to swim, even fora short distance."

Fortunately, the Villagers later managed to use a long strong rope to pull the
marooned boy to safety.

Where was Rukuni Village?

When did Mkonto go to settle in Rukuni Village?

What is the ‘Afrikaans’ mentioned in the story?

Do you think Mkonto was a truthful man?

Why do you think Mkonto refused to go and rescue the boy marooned on an
island?

(ii) Choose the correct answer.
6.

According to this passage, how many languages are spoken in South Africa?

A. one B. several C. adozen D. five
How many languages did Mkonto claim to be able to speak?
A. two 'B. five C. twelve D. six

From the passage* which word is opposite in meaning to the word ‘rural’?
A. urban B. strange C. sleepy D. remote



--- Page 113 ---
TAKU BI Crnxutuuh -

9. Tosave someone from a dangerous or an unpleasant situation is to
A. boast B. be cornered C. swim D. rescue
10. Which is the correct meaning of the word ‘marooned’?
A. Fishing in the middle of a big river.
B. Unable to swim, even for.a short distance.
C. Caught in a place and unable to leave.
D. Crying for help.
11. The news that a boy had been marooned on an island came while Mkonto
was .
A. ata prayer meeting
B. boasting that he was a very good swimmer
C. ataswimming competition
D. fishing in the big Save River .
12. According to this story, the boy who had been marooned on an island was

A. very good at swimming

B. later drowned by the rising waters of the flooding river

C. saved from drowning by the villagers

D. one of the many sons of the mother who came crying for help
13. What does this story teach people who go out fishing?

A. To tell the truth all the time.

B. Never to boast.

C. To help others.

D. Not to fish while sitting or standing in the middle of a river.
14, When a place is described as ‘sleepy’, .
it is very quiet and does not have much activity
the people in that place are always fast asleep
it is noisy with a lot of activities going on
it has very few people living in it

TOP>

“ine -ing form of the verb os on adjective

Example: The bay was marooned by the rising water of the Save River.
(the verb rising is used as an adjective describing the water of the Save
River)

(a) Say the following sentences correctly with the -ing form of the verbs in brackets:

When mother does the laundry, she uses a strong (wash) powder.

This book has (interest) stories.

The old man always carries his (walk) stick wherever he goes.

The (rise) sun looks like a big, red ball.

A mirror is also Known as a (look) glass.

akwWN>



--- Page 114 ---
6. The children enjoy playing with the (skip) rope.
7. Everyday our family gathers in the (sit) room for the evening prayer.
8. We now have (run) water in many homes.
hy 9. lalways enjoy watching the (set) sun.
| 10. | used some (wrap) paper to cover the parcel.

"| (b) Using the - in: form of verbs as adjectives, say your own full, correct

sentences,
Here are some of the verbs that you may use:
| drink cook read build smell
write . fall travel shine play
grow . cry sing talk laugh

interest follow smile

ba grea re prays

of In 30 words, write a summary of the story: The boastful Mkonto that you have read
\ in this unit. You may use these guidelines if you wish:
* where Mkonto lived
what kind of a man Mkonto was
what Mkonto boasted about the languages he could speak
his school days

e e e e

e Say the sentence below correctly after the teacher:

* He can run as fast as lightning. ;
Did you note that the gh in the word lightning are silent? .

' Say the following words correctly. The g!: in them are silent.

height : freight straight through thigh
pb drought thorough
Say your own words with the silent gh in them.

%
Lot ayes be pne
SS Mt

Your teacher will ask you to'make a short speech on any of the following topics or
any other which he/she will choose for you. Your short speech should not last more
than:a minute.



--- Page 115 ---
ee ee ee

ee

The day | will never forget

My pet . .

A stranger who helped me greatly
My favourite hobby

A sad moment | will never forget
A story from the newspapers
What | dislike most

Child marriages

Sports at school

Trees

Using the guidelines below, write a composition about someone who was boastful
and was later shamed one day. Write your composition in 80 - 100 words under the
heading: The boastful person | know.

the person who was boastful

where that person lived

what the boastful person was saving and doing
what happened one day

the lesson which you learned from that.



--- Page 116 ---
~

Listen carefully as your teacher gives instructions on how to read the football lo

below.

The football log standings

Team [Pp fw ft [D> TF
TheRangess [6 [4 [i [i [73 [5
BlackMambas [6 [4 [2 |o 13 [7
| Swallows [6 [3 [1 [2 fa [i
Mbombera Stars [6 [2 [2 |2 [io [7

Key: P-played (games) W-Won (games} L-Lost (games)
D-Draw (games) F- goals scored for/by the team
A-goals scored against the team
P- Points at 3 points for a win, 1 point for a draw and 0 points for a loss)

Example:

The Rangers played 6 games, won 4 of those games, lost 1 game and drew 1 game.
They scored 13 goals and had § goals scored against them. Their goal difference
is (13-5) 8. Altogether the Rangers have 13 pcints.

(a) Say the same for each of the other teams on the football log above.

(6) Look at the sports logs in the newspapers. Discuss the log standings in full.

E-mails
electronic efficiently _ _ recipient permanent record
convenient appointments _ effectively regardless click
internet faulted , viruses program printing

corrupted

designed constructed



--- Page 117 ---
FA A el et

Nowadays more people communicate through e-mails than through the
traditional letters. E-mail, the short for electronic mail, is a written message sent
through a computer. The e-mail is sent from one computer and received through
another computer. The person who sends the e-mail is the sender or composer
and the one who receives the email is the recipient.

E-mails have many advantages over the traditional letters; the biggest being that
they are convenient and user-friendly. They can be sent quickly in an instant.
The sender simply types the message, then clicks the send button. Once the
e-mail is sent, it should reach the recipient at once if there are no connectivity

problems.

E-mail corrections, changes and additions can be made cleanly without having
to cross out words. The composer simply erases or deletes the unwanted words
and then types in the new words ona clean sheet.

With e-mails, one can communicate with anyone, regardless of where they are.
Therefore, one can make appointments and bookings effectively, quickly and
efficiently.

E-mails can be stored and kept as permanent records for future use. Further,
e-mails can be sent and stored with attachments such as photographs, paintings,
tables or files.

In the workplace, people can use e-mails to communicate easily without having
to call meetings or move from one office to another carrying messages. With
e-mails, people do not have to spend time trying to get through on the phone in
order to leave messages or make enquiries.



--- Page 118 ---
The cost of sending an e-mail is very low, unlike the costs of the other means of
communication. Sending an e-mail costs the same regardless of the distance to
the recipient or the number of recipients. The use of e-mails also saves paper and
printing costs.

However, not alll people have computers. Also, not all computers are connected
to the internet and without the internet they cannot send or receive e-mails.
Sometimes misunderstandings happen between people when e-mails are not
correctly constructed.

Some e-mails have ended in the wrong hands when they have been sent in
error to people who are not the rightful recipients. Also, some e-mails have been
corrupted or faulted by computer viruses. These are dirty computer programs that
damage or destroy information including e-mails. Fortunately, there are other

good computer programmes designed to protect the Computer from computer
viruses.

tee

Answer the questions below in full, correct answers.

1. What is an e-mail?

2. The person who sends ane-mailis the.

3. In what ways is an e-mail better than the traditional letter?

4. How does the composer of an e-mail make corrections to the message?

5. How do people in one workplace but in different offices benefit from using

e-mails?

Why do most people communicate through e-mails than through the traditional

letter nowadays?

7. The dirty computer programmes that damage or destroy information
including e-mails are called _

8. What must your Computer be connected to for you to be able to send or
receive e-mails?

oO

1, When something is said to be convenient, it is
A. not easy for you and unsuitable for your needs
B. easy for you and suitable for your needs
C. difficult to understand and to use
D. traditional, old and needs to be change
2. A thing is user-frieridly when it is _.
A. used by people who are friends



--- Page 119 ---
B. used by many people
C. used by friendly people
D. easy to use or to understanc
3. In order to send and receive e-mails there must be
A. only one computer
B. two computers
C. two computers, both connected to the internet
D. atelephone
4. The use of e-mails has __.
A. increased the use of the traditional letter
B. stopped people from using the traditional letter
C. brought higher costs for communicating
D. reduced the use of the traditional letter -
5. The person who receives an e-mail is known as the
A. recipient 8B. sender B. composer OD. writer
6. According to this passage, computers .
A. cannow be protected against computer viruses
B. cannot be used when they are not connected to the internet
C. are only used in the workplaces
D. have brought misunderstancings between people
7. Some e-mails have ended in the wrong hands. The wrong hands are
A. the people who do not compose e-mails correctly
B. the people who are not the rightful recipients of the e-mails
C. anyone who makes wrong spellings and errors in the e-mails
D. the people who send viruses to the computers
8. The person who sends an e-mail is called the sender or
recipient
virus
internet
composer

A.
B.
C.
D.

Example: The e-mails are user-friendly.

Rewrite the sentences below with hyphens on the underlined words.

1. The well dressed learners were very well behaved and also hard working.

2. The vice president praised the long distance runner for a job well done in
winning the long awaited marathon race.

3. That soft spoken woman has become well to do and very well known for selling
the best low fat home made cakes.

4. The long suffering family lives in ci semi detatched house in a run down suburb
south west of the city. ~ .



--- Page 120 ---
5. The no nonsense, off duty policeman fought the hard hearted man in self
defence.

6. You are well advised _ to sit in the non smoking area of the hall during the film
show.

7. That home made sweet drink is non alcoholic,

8. The person drives q rn down, second hanid car.

Say this sentence correctly after the teacher:
The quiet boy was quite quick to quarrel.

Say the following words correctly,

queen liquid question quality equal request
quantity. squash quiz sequence equipment acquire
acquit squeeze = squatter squeal squeak squalid

enquire square squander quote quibble squirrel

Pa
Soap ht ad we AGREES

A boy asked his father for instructions to mend a puncture in one of the tubes of
his bicycle. The boy later wrote the instructions but mixed them up. Rewrite these
instructions in good order, starting with the first.

Mending a puncture in a bicycle tube

Make the patch stick firmly by Pressing it tightly onto the tube.

Make the puncture area rough by filing it with a file ora rough object.

Begin by taking the tube out of the tyre.

Mend the puncture by sticking a patch over the puncture or the hole.

Test your puncture repair by putting the tube underwater again and looking for
air bubbles.

* Remove any pieces of dirt around the filed area surrounding the hole.

* Test the tube for punctures by putting it underwater and looking for air bubbles.

ing ent to the verb

Example: =
Mother sent an e-mail to the doctor making an appointment.
By adding =ment to the verb Appoint the noun appointment is formed.



--- Page 121 ---
med by adding -ment to the following verbs:
require judge govern measure

Say the nouns for
5 employ disappoint

settle excite treat move -pay arrange
develop punish enjoy state argue agree equip asses

famous place away from your home. On
- 120 words

Imagine that you are going to travel to a
the way you would like to spend one night at a friend’s house. In 80
write an e-mail to that friend in which you:
-tell your friend to where and when you will be travelling

-say with whom and how you will be travelling —

-ask for overnight accommodation
-say the time of day you hope to arriv
-state whether or not you will also nee

eat the friend’s house
d dinner/supper and breakfast.

lently. Then read fluently and clearly to the teacher

First read the whole passage Si
hs selected for you by the teacher.

only one of the two paragrap
A memorable day in Zimbabwe

Zimbabweans celebrate their attainment
of independence with a lot of excitement. The government makes special
arrangements for the people's entertainment and enjoyment. There are sporting
activities and music shows for the people's amusement and merriment.

~ On the eighteenth of April every year,

The presidert makes announcements on the developments andimprovements
in the country as well as on the achivements of the previous year. In between
the announcements, the president chants some slogans of encouragement
and the people respond in agreernent. A slogan is a short statement or phrase
in support of something. The slogans chanted are usually short statements of

commitment to hard work, unity and loyalty.



--- Page 122 ---
Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

NAOAR WD =

fee)

. When do Zimbabwe
- How do Zimbabweans celebrate the attai
- What announcements does the president mak
- Whatkind of slogans does the president chantinbe
. How do the people respond to the president's slogans?
. What is a slogan?

. Give any two examples of activities that are arranged for the people's

ans celebrate the attainment of their independence?
nment of their independence?
© on Independence Day?’ ,
tween the announcements?

amusement and merriment.

- According fo this Passage, do you think the people enjoy celebrating their

country’s independence day or not?

First, look at the nouns written in bold in the Passage A memorable day. Then,
listen carefully as your teacher reads out ten of those nouns while you write them.



--- Page 123 ---
ere ie

a) a tet

Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about malaria.

Malariais a serious, life-threatening disease spread by mosquitoes. When a mosquito
bites a person who already has malaria, it sucks the blood of that person. When
the same mosquito bites the next person who may not have malaria, it injects
the blood with malaria into that person. That way, the deadly disease malaria is
spread. The best way to prevent the spread of malaria is to prevent mosquito bites.
if one has malaria already, one must get treatment as quickly as possible.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

What is malaria?

Which insect spreads malaria?

What is the best way to stop the spread of malaria?

What must one do if one has malaria already?

When do you think a disease is referred to as ‘life-threatening’?
How is malaria spread from one person to another?

Would you say that mosquitoes are harmless or harmful insects?

NOOR ON>

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Taking precautions

2» suburb . privacy wonderful harmful

outskirts

completing stagnant homestead breeding precaution

alert prevalent mesh

surface

In January, the Mataka family moved into a new house they had Dui on =
outskirts of the suburb. This was in the middle of the wet season and there was °c
grass growing all around the new house. The eight-roomed house was SUTOUNSSS
by a brick wall, a precaution against the wandering animals. Thé DICK wo wos
also for privacy.



--- Page 124 ---
i
U

UU
6

The skillful builders of the new house had done a wonderful job. However, the
builders had left empty tins, buckets and old tyres lying about. Now all these were
full of rain water. The builders had also left the ground with an uneven surface.
Now there were small pools of stagnant water full of dirt in many places. Because
this water was not flowing, it was now smelling.

s a 2% rg : 3 i
ie ENiccae or Pei we mets Psy: 73 as

This kept the Mataka family very busy in their first days' stay at the new house.
They cut the tall grass. They removed the tins, the buckets and the old tyres. They
filled the small pools of stagnant water with sand and levelled the ground. “Why
are we doing all these things?" asked Joachirn, one of the Mataka children.

"To stop mosquitoes from breeding here," Mr Mataka replied. “Unless we do
that," Mr Mataka continued, “our home will become a breeding ground for
mosquitoes, the harmful insects that spread malaria, a deadly disease."

“Oh yes!" said Serina, Joachim's only sister. “Now | remember what we learned at
school. There was a malaria alert last year. Many people did not take precautions
and they became ill with malaria. We must take all the precautions we can to
prevent the spread of malaria."

“What other precautions can we take?" Joachim asked.

His mother explained,” Your father has also bought mosquito nets for all of us:
even for our visitors. We must always sleep under the mosquito nets. These nets



--- Page 125 ---
will prevent the mosquito from reaching and biting Us when we are asleep.”
Then Mr Mataka added, “We must also stay indoors in the evenings during the
wet season when the mosquitoes are prevalent. In the evenings, We must also
wear clothes that cover most of the body. including the arms and the legs.”

“Yes! We must leave NO stone unturned in our fight against the deadly mosquito,”
Mrs Mataka said. “malaria is a killer disease. It kills more people than traffic
accidents do. Fortunately, malaria can be cured, but only if one gets quick
treatment.”

Fe beste

Choose the correct answers.
1. Why did the Mataka family buile a brick wall round their new house?
A. To keep out the flowing water.
B. For protection and privacy.
C. To keep out mosquitoes.
D. To make the place beautiful.
2. Something that you do to prevent danger oF harm is called a .
A. practice B. duty C. precaution D. treatment |
3. Mosquitoes are orevalent in the wet season. The word prevalent means

A. very few B. very common C. notseen D. only harmful
4. A deadly disease like malaria is one that

A. does not kill. B. cannot be cured
C. is not painful D. can kill
5. Which word used in the story means to stop something from happening?
A. prevent B. cure C. prevalent D. privacy
6. The phrase leave no stone unturned used in the last paragraph means
* A. look carefully B. not worry too much
Cc. do nothing D. try everything
7. The Mataka family was doing what it was doing because .
A. time is money. B. prevention is better than cure

C. new brooms sweep clean D. practice makes perfect
This story says that malaria .

A. is there only during the rainy season

B. kills less people that the iraffic accidents

C. does not kill any people

en @uPyP EPS ESS PO Chere eee pee CRS. aces or Trig:

Say each sentence on the next page after the teacher pausing a little where there
is a comma. :



--- Page 126 ---
~

2a

=

& ©

7

(a) On My way to the shops | met Joachirn, one of the Mataka Children,

(The phrase One-cof t taka childr 2N tells Us who Joachim is.)
(b) Bulawayo Airport is named after Joshuq Mqabu

(The phrase q national hero tells ys who Joshua Maqabuko

Nkomo is )

Cc) | grew UP in Gokwe, q district in the Midlands Province.

(The Phrase q istrict in the Midlands Province tells us where Gokwe is.)

(qd) Malaria, the disease spread by Mosquitoes, can kill if not treated quickly,
(The phrase isease spre SQUItOSs tells Us what malariq is.)

In the same way, make up your own sentenc

Place with q Phrase telling us who that person
is.

© about a person or something or q
or something is or where that place

que atthe end of gq word, for example, physique also says k,

Say the following words correctly after your teacher,
Queue technique Oblique
boutique plaque antique

The cve in them Says k.
Unique Physique

Say each of the following sentences correctly after the teacher.

* We did not go out fishing because the weather was too cold.

* The police could not catch the speeding car because it was too fast.

* My brother who is Only sixteen years of age is too young to get married.

* After walking for q long distance, the children were too tired to continue.
Using -:> in the same way, make UP your own complete sentences.

We ety

i ee

elps us to q

23 on page 13].



--- Page 127 ---
In the same way and using the contents page of this book, say where you would go
to if you want to learn about:

(a) the tree (b) making wise decisions

(c) rural and urban Zimbabwe (d) safety tips

(e) borrowing and lending -  (f) looking after the environment
(g) malaria (h) the world heritage sites

(i) making polite requests (j) comparing things

(k) taking part ina conversation (I) offering an idea or a plan

(m) special days (n) warnings and instructions

(o) the quiz

Practise good handwriting with the following letters and sentences; writing quickly
at the same time.

Xx Xx Xavier and Xoliwe speak Xangani.

Yy Yy Yananai says yes to everything you ask him.

Zz Zz Zuze and Lindiwe crossed the Zambezi between Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Ww Ww When will William walk with the women who work for Mr White?

Vv Vv Every week Vimbai and Venancia visit one another.

Imagine that a malaria alert was issued in the area where one of your friends lives.
Write a letter to that friend telling him the precautions that he/she must take. The
body of your letter should be 80 — 120 words in length. In the letter say the following:

¢ that you have heard that a malaria alert was issued in ...(where) ...

* what malaria is and how it is spread

¢ the precautions your friend should take to avoid getting malaria

* how your friend can tell whether or not he/she has caught malaria

¢ what your friend should da if he/she thinks he/she has got malaria.



--- Page 128 ---
Listen carefully as the teacher reads to you about this short happening.

Drug abuse

became worse and had to be rushed to q doctor. The doctor gave him some
medicine and told him to take one tablet three times a day.

Francis, however, wanted to get well quickly. When he got home, he decided to
take two tablets three times per day. Instead of getting well, Francis actually got

at all.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
Was it right for Francis to take the medicine left by his mother?
What did the doctor instruct Francis to do with the tablets he gave him?

Why did Francis become worse the second time?

If you were the doctor, what would you have told Francis?
What does it mean to say that Francis hacl abused the tablets?
This story teaches us —_and___.

Was Francis the doctor or the patient in this story?

I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

ssage and answer the questions that follow.
._* Warnings and instructions

signpost queve frespasses prosecuted court inhale
protective spray medicines thoroughly harmful emphasize
swallow judgement | protection chemical. container extremely
SoBe.
Ge:



--- Page 129 ---
One day Joachim, his sister Serina and other learners were walking home from
school when they saw a new'signpost. They stood in a queue as they read the
words on the new signpost: .

| No through road. Trespassers will be prosecuted |

The learners then took another route home. Joachim was walking some metres
behind the rest when he picked an empty beer bottle that was lying in the grass.
He looked at it and saw that on its side were these words:

| Not for persons under the age of eighteen |

Joachim quickly threw the empty bottle away; not wanting anyone, not even his
sister, to know what he had picked.

When they got home, Joachim and Serina told their father about the signpost
they had seen on the way.

Their father explained that the signpost meant that people were not allowed to
walk or pass through that area. People who.walk or pass through such an area
could be arrested and taken to a court of law for judgement.

Then Joachim said to his father, "| see you are wearing overalls, gumboots, hand
gloves and a face mask. Why all that, dad?”

“These are protective clothing,” his father replied. “| wear them whenever | am
spraying pesticides or herbicides in the garden. | also wear the protective clothing
when lam spraying pesticides in and around the house. Protective clothing gives
protection against injury, damage, sickness or pain.”

Mr Mataka had put some rat poison in the ceiling of the house to kill the rats that
were making a lot of noise, especially at night. The rat poison was also a pesticide.

Joachim and Serina looked at each of the bottles with the sprays used by their
father; one by one. These were the warnings and instructions on the bottles:

* Keep out of reach of children and pets.

Wear protective clothing during use.

Do not spray on food.

Do not handle food while spraying.

Harmful if swallowed or inhaled.

Thoroughly wash hands after use.

Mr Mataka emphasized to the children that people must read and understand
the instructions and warnings in order to be safe. Then Mr Mataka showed the
children the triangles with different colours on the containers of various pesticides
and explained their meanings:

ee

sere

as


--- Page 130 ---
eu [=| Ee

., J ee ee, ee, = ee. F&F

A purple triangle means that the chemical inside
that container is extremely poisonous.

* Must be hanclled with extreme care.

¢ The poison is extremely lethal or very dangerous.
* Full protective clothing including gloves,
overalls, goggles, breathing mask must be
worn when using this chemical.

A red triangle means that the chemical inside that
container is a very dangerous poison.

¢ Should not be used in the home.

° Safety precautions must be followed.

An amber triangle means that the chemical inside
that container is poisonous.

* To be handled with care.
¢ Safety precautions should be followed.

A green iriangle means that caution should be
exercised when using the chemical inside this
container.

¢ — Is less toxic but must still be handled with care.
° May be used in the home.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

1. What does the sign ‘No through road' mean?

2. Why do you think Joachim did not want cnyone to know what he had picked

and thrown away? :

3. Why should people wear protective clothing?

4. What must people do before using sprays and medicines?

5. Ared triangle on a pesticide container means __,
6
7
8

on : ee

Which colour shows that a pesticide may oe used in the home?
How is the containér of an extremely poisonous pesticide shown?
Is it safe to eat anything while one is handling pesticides?

— ee


--- Page 131 ---
Choose the correct meaning for each word.

1.

To trespass is to

-A. pass an examination

B. walk past a signpost

C. to go into or pass through an area without permission
D. live in one place for a very long time

A pesticide is

A. asubstance that is used to kill unwanted pests like rats and mosquitoes
B. analcoholic drink like beer

C. aroadin the rural areas

D. something that gives you a lot of trouble

Gumboots are protective shoes lbecause they

A. look beautiful

B. are worn by adults

C. give warmth

D. are for protection

The word ‘harmful’ describes something that

A. is safe to work with

B. is found everywhere

C. causes pain, injury or sickness

D. does not cause pain, injury or sickness

A herbicide is a

A. very big animal like an elephant

B. substance used to destroy the unwanted weeds or herbs

_C. kind of a tree that grows in the forest

D. place that has a lot of insects
The word ‘lethal’ means
A. very dangerous and capable of killing
B. unable to move
C. very long and straight
D. lovely
To ‘inhale’ is tO
A. leave a place ina hurry
B. allow someone to do something
C. breathe in air, smoke or any other substance into the lungs -
D. ask too many questions
The word ‘instructions’ means __
A. aseries of statements on how to do or use something |
B. surprises
C. people who are gathered | in one place
D. stories



--- Page 132 ---
ee

?. A ‘precaution’ is something that you do in order to
A. win a prize in a competition
B. prevent injury, pain, harm or trouble
. C. become well-known or famous
D. be popular with everyone

~ 4

a a en o te a
sha? orepored speeacn

Research on the different colours of the triangles.on the containers of chemicals,
their meanings and the Precautions people must take when using these chemicals.

Give a short speech to the class on this. If you have access to computers use them
in your research and for Preparing the speech.

Say this sentence after your teacher:
The learners stood in q queue going into the rnusic lesson.

The u in Queve and in music says its name (not sound)

Read this poem aloud filling in the name
Afterwards, take turns to recite the poem.

of your school in the blank space.

st | The underlined y Says its name as in music.

a Of child abuse

a | We, the learners at____ School: .
4 Condemn and refuse
v Child sexual abuse,

“a Or any other form of child abuse. -

y? And we salute

All those who refuse

To excuse or rescue
Those who are accused
Of child sexual abuse.
Any kind of child abuse

Is NO amusement at all,
As any child abused =
Cannot be cured

Of the acute pain forever,



--- Page 133 ---
Say these words correctly. The u says its name as in music.
refuse deputy fury perfume rebuke refugee argument reputation dispute
argue confuse issue cube execute cuboid mule costumes musician

CENSUSES

Write a composition about someone who got into trouble because he/she did not
listen to warnings or follow instructions. Give your composition a heading and write
it in 80 - 120 words. In the composition say:

-who got into trouble, when, where

-what he or she was doing

-the warnings or the instructions

-how he or she got into trouble

-what the trouble was

-what happened in the end

-the lesson other people learnt as a result of this.

First, look at the second paragraph of the passage: Drug abuse. Afterwards, the
teacher will dictate the paragraph while you write it neatly and quickly.
«once aaa umcansassnusssaesisi veasertea VM

aun ee BRP SH

‘i
wi

Listen carefully as your teacher reads this paragraph to you:

Tom, Jane and Uncle Ruben

Tom and Jane were missing their uncle very much. Whenever their uncle was
away, there was nobody at home to tell the young twins interesting stories.
Uncle Ruben Fiad been admitted in hospital for a fortnight. One day the twins
were visiting him there. At the entrance into the men’s ward, Tom and Jane
got disappointed. Right in front of them a big notice had these words:

“
‘

Strictly no children

”

Then, just as they were about to leave, they got a pleasant surprise. There,
sitting on a wooden bench and enjoying the mid-morning sunshine outside the
men's ward, was their beloved Uncle Ruben. The two children rushed to hug
their uncle whom they had been missing for the past two weeks. -



--- Page 134 ---
Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

. Why were Tom and Jane missing Uncle Ruben so much?
Where was Uncle Ruben in this story?

. For how long had he been there?

. What disappointed the two children at the hospital?

Were the children happy at the end and why?

. If Tom was twelve years old, how old was Jane?

. Does this story show that Tom and Jane liked their uncle or not?
. How long is a fortnight?

ONAMnAWN—

Imagine that you were Tom or Jane in the short story read to you in Listen on the
previous page. Rewrite the whole story correctly in short as Tom or Jane. Your
summary should bei in 30-40 words.

Read the story Tom, Jane and Uncle Ruben to your teacher with fluency and
clarity.

Complete these sentences with the correct word from the four words given in
brackets.

1. Water that is not flowing is __- ___ (deep /dirty/stagnant/polluted).

2. Mosquitoes are insects. (protective/victorious/harmful)

3. Malaria is a disease that can kill. (deadly/safe/private/fortunate)

4. Becareful when you handle chemicals. (cruel/harmless/poisonous/
curious) )

5. Pesticides are . (accidental/attractive/toxic/fearful)

6. Crops grow well in soil. (seasonal/fertile/ merciful/comfortable)

7~
pes



--- Page 135 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher reads this short passage fo you:

The school heroine

Sports competitions between our school, St Joseph's, and Riverside School always
attract huge multitudes of spectators. In the last three meetings, Riverside had
won the girls’ one hundred meters race. Therefore, for the next sports competition
between our schools, | practiced hard for this race and hoped to win it.

During the race, | ran like a possessed person. | could hear my schoolmates
shouting, “Maria! Maria!” as they cheered me on. | was the first to cross the
finishing line. The cheering not only continued, but became louder and louder as
| was raised to the winner's podium. From that day, | have become our school’s
sports heroine. .

Answer these questions, in full correct sentences.

1. Who wrote this passage? -

2. Were the sports competitions between St Joseph's and Riverside Schools
popular or not?

3. Which school had won the girls’ hundred metres’ race before?

4. How many times had that school won the girls’ hundred metres’ race?

5. Which school won in the girls’ hundred metres’ race between the two schools
in the fourth competition?

6. Who won in the girls’ hundred metres’ race?

7. What do you think a heroine is?

8. Which words in the story tell us that many people watched the sports

competitiofs between St Joseph and Riverside Schools?

First, see how the second paragraph in the passage The school heroine is written,
including all the punctuation marks. Then, your teacher will. dictate this second
paragraph while you write it correctly.



--- Page 136 ---
Read this Story and answer the questions that follow. ©

The village hero and heroine
resettled adequate Pastures livestock distant
expecting contractors treatment truckloads ceremony
construct ’ materials council allocated support
workforce fanfare pomp instant community
honour VIP DA MP MC

there were adequate pastures for their livestock.

There was one problem, however. Mabasa Clinic, the nearest health centre, was
eight kilometers away from the new Chatora Village. That distance was far too
long for the sick, injured and expecting mothers.

MABASA
CLINIC

One day Mr and Mrs Takura Paid a visit to the people of the new Chatora Village.
Before they moved to the city where they had become Prosperous building
contractors, they had lived with these people in the old village. They had come
to see how the people had settled in the new village.

When Mr and Mrs Takura were told that the problem was that the clinic was too
far, they made Up their mind to do something for the people.

s



--- Page 137 ---
Four months later, Mr and Mrs Takura returned to the new Chatora Village. They
came with a gang of workers and two truckloads of building materials. They
quickly started constructing a clinic just across the Mazare stream. This was the

site they had been allocated by the district council.

The villagers came out in their numbers to assist. Some were working with the
builders and carpenters on the construction site. Others were cooking for the
construction workers. Another group of workers and villagers was constructing
a foot bridge across the Mazare stream. With this foot bridge, the villagers were
not going to step in the cold and sometimes dirty stream water when going to or |
from the clinic.

Soon, the people of the new Chatora Village had a new Clinic. At the opening
ceremony there was pomp and fanfare. Many people, including the local
Member of Parliament and the District Administrator turned up. Mr and Mrs
Takura instantly became hero and heroine respectively. Throughout the opening
ceremony, the Master of Ceremonies kept referring to the two. Some villagers
sang songs in their praise. The learners from the local school recited poems
praising them.

The people of the new Chatora Village agreed to name the clinic Takura Clinic.
Up to this day, the village elders keep hoping that there will be other new heroes
and heroines from their community.

cig .
Aste i oad

% rs |

i ‘ er

Answer the questions below in full, correct sentences.

1. Why were the people of the new Chatora Village happy when they were |
' resettled in a new area?

2. What was the problem faced by the villagers of the new Chatora Village?

3. For what reason did Mr and Mrs Takura pay a visit to the people of the new
Chatora Village?

4. Did the villagers of the new Chatora Village help in the construction of the clinic
andifso,how?

5. Explain why it was necessary to build a foot bridge.

6. Why did the villagers agree to name the clinic Takura Clinic?

7. From this story, what do you think a hero or a heroine is?

Say the following abbreviations in full.
1. a.m. (for time) 2. p.m. (for time) 3. km/h (for speed)



--- Page 138 ---
4. Hre (a city) 5S. Byo (acity) 6. Zim. (a country)
7. doz. (a quantity) 8. tv (a household item) %. UZ (acentre for learning)

10. e.g. 11. c/o 12. CID (part of the police)
13. etc. 14. PTO 15. Hon. .
16. AU 17. GMB (for farmers) 18. ZRP (law enforcement)

19. ZNA (army) 20. ZBC (radio) 21. ClO (security)

Mr and Mrs Takura instantly became hero and heroine respectively.

Answer these questions:

1. Who became (a) a hero (b) a heroine?

2. Isa (a) hero (b) heroine a man or a woman?

Note: Hero is the opposite gender of heroine just as man is the opposite gender
of woman.

Complete these sentences with the opposite gender of the underlined noun,
selecting your answers from this box:

mayoress ‘poetess “niece _ ‘madam. ‘actress princess lioness heiress
waitress spinster hostess widow bride daughter aunt shepherdess

The prince and the are the children of the king and the queen.
Both the waiter and the work at the city hotel.

Ai my birthday party, my father was the host while mother was the

During their wedding, the bridegroom kissed the ,

The Moyo family has only one son and one .

Both my uncle and my are here to see me.

My brother is still a bachelor while my sister is also still a

Sir Jones and Brown are both government ministers.

The mayor and the were both joresent at the agricultural show.

0. A widower is a man whose wife has died while a is A woman whose

ARWN >

ZR ON

Say these sentences one by one fo the class: ‘

* They were resettled in an area that used to be a farm. (It was once a farm.)

* Those two boys ysed to be enemies but now they are good friends.

* lused to like sweets but now | do not like them at all.

¢ Jonas used to go to church every week and now he has stopped completely.



--- Page 139 ---
“TAM ADSZW 9 | Crrutud A.

Now say your own sentences with vse i fc. .

Read these sentences to the class: .
* There were many passengers on the bus. (We use many for countable things.)
° There is not much water in the dam. (We use much for uncountable things.)

Complete the following sentences using much or many:

1. balls. 2. music.

3. songs. 4. joy.

5. flowers. 6. sugar.

7. tea. 8. boys.

9. pencils. 10. power.

Mr and Mrs Takura made up their mind to do something for their people. See what

they did after making up their mind in the story The village hero and heroine.

Then, imagine that you made up your mind to do something. Write a composition
on what you made up your mind to do. Give your composition a heading in line
with what you made up your mind to do. Your composition should be 80 - 120
words in length. In your composition show:

* what you made up your mind to do and why

¢ the preparations you made

e how you did if

¢ the help you got from other people

¢« how it ended.

&



--- Page 140 ---
=- FF

—

English Paper 1
Time: | hour 30 minutes (Total marks: 40)
Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

cord term assessment: |

ree
+

aes

Mtero’s changed life

Mtero grew up.in a neighbourhood with very old and crowded small houses.
The majority of the people walked barefoot. Hardly did any of the children go
to school. Among the few that did many were drop-outs. Hunger, diseases
and deaths were common.

Mitero decided to go toa far-away land to look for a job. He would come
back when he had made a lot of money. Then he would not need to work at
all, so he thought.

Off Mtero went. There he soon got employed to look after the children of a
very well-to-do widow. The rich widow and her family lived a high-class life in
a big mansion near a big dam. Lining up the walls of the mansion were life-size
photographs of the widow and her late husband. What surprised Mtero most
was that, despite her plentiful riches, the widow Still worked very hard.

One day Mtero nearly drowned as he dived deep into the dam to save the
widow's only son from drowning. The rich widow was so grateful to Mtero that
she gave him half of her wealth. With all this new wealth, Mtero decided to
return to his place of birth.

When Mtero got there, he immediately bought a big farm. He employed all the
able-bodied men and women on that farm. Some were feeding and looking
after the livestock. Others were working in the plantations. Mtero encouraged
everyone to work hard by working hard himself. Soon the farm was making a
lot of money and the lives of the people began to improve. ‘

. Mtero grew up in @_’ .

A. poor environment B. wealthy environment
C. big family D. land, “ar away from his home



--- Page 141 ---
_ Walking barefoot means walking .
A. very bravely . B. like a very poor man
C. with no shoes on the feet D. with a lot of difficulty
_ In the area where Mtero grew U|>, _______-
A. there were no schools B. no children were going to school
C. there were no children D. very few children went to school
_ When Mtero went away to look for a job,
A. he was already a wealthy man
B. he wanted to come back one day
C. he was not thinking of ever coming back
D. he nearly drowned on the way
_ When we talk of someone as ‘the late’ we mean that the person is
A. always late for meetings B. still alive somewhere
Cc. dead D. hard-working
_ Which of these statements is true?
A. Mtero was employed as a farm worker.
B. The widow had one child.
C. Mtero did not like the people of his place of birth.
D. The widow had only one son.
_ How did Mtero encourage the people to work hard?

A. By employing them.
C. By working hard himself.

B. By talking to them.
D. By giving them a lot of work to do.

Choose the correct question endings.

8. You are Paul's friend,
A. isn't it B. aren't you

9.

?

C. weren't you D. can't you

| think | Know you, ?
A. aren't you B. haven't you C. isn't it
10. You will assist me whenever | need help,
A. can't you B. won't you C. COU

D. don't |

?
Idn't you D. shouldn't you

Choose the correct tense to complete the sentence.

11. When he came into my bedroom, | what he was looking for.
A. know B. knows C. knowing D. knew

12. | nearly broke my arm when }__ from a tall tree.
A. fall ~» 8B. fell C. falls D. falling

‘Choose the word with the same meaning as the underlined.
13. 1am very grateful to my classmates for their assistance.

A. tactful B. thankful C. careful D. wonderful
14.1 believe whatever she says because she is very honest.
A. humble B. polite C. truthful D. obedient
Choose the correct meaning of the abbreviations.
15. a.m. A. afternoon 8B. before noon C. another D. lam
16. c/o A. careful B. cannot C. country D. care of

PY

bay

3
"e

rs
=
*
Mo
es

=e



--- Page 142 ---
Choose the correct word fo fill in the blank space.

17. We will be late for the game we hurry up.
A. if B. unless C. until D. but

18. We could not see the stars at night of the dark clouds.
A. without | B. whether C. because D. behind

‘Which word means the opposite of the underlined one?

19. In this country, many people use private transport when travelling.

A. public B. bus C. self D. road
20. The driver forgot to apply the brakes at the traffic lights.
A. managed B. decided C. rememberedD. agreed

Choose the suitable verb to complete the sentence.

21. After running for some time, | began to __

A. aspire si. retire C. perspire D. hire

22. | have come to if there cire any fruits on sale.
A. require B. expire C. admire D. enquire

23. The farmer has a bigger tractor to pull the heavy plough.
A. purchased B. earned C. constructed D. produced °

Read this poem and answer the questions that follow.

The crazy game

In my rural set up

Where | grew UP strong

Eating the wild fruits that nature provided
With the other herd boys of my age

Fist fights made news

And the winners instant heroes.

Now in this crazy world
Taken over by what they call

The most beautiful game

In which eleven players aside :

Spend ninety minutes plus extra time
Kicking and running

After a dead animal skin filled with air, .
Many supporters of this crazy game have lost lives
With heart-breaks and heart attacks
When their favourite teams lost;

Or in traffic accidents .

On crazy trips just t&go and watch

Their favourite teams

Kicking and running

After a dead animal skin filled with air.



--- Page 143 ---
Choose the correct word fo complete the senience.

36. The cutting down of trees in a wide area is known as

A. erosion B. prevention C. pollution D. deforestation
37. A period of two weeks is known as a _
A. weekend B, fortnight C. duration D. holiday
38. Something that is fit to be eaten is

A. audible B. portable C. edible , D. visible
39. In which word does the y have a different sound from the rest?
A. excuse .— B. stubborn C. music D. introduce

40. Which of the following sentences is correctly written?
A. The teacher this is John my brother.
B. The teacher said, “this is John my brother.
C. The teacher said, “This is John, my brother.”
D. The teacher said “This is John my brother.”

English Paper 2

Time: | hour 45 minutes

SECTION A COMPOSITION (20 MARKS)

You are advised to spend 1 hour on this section.

Answer either question 1 or 2 but not both.

1. Write a composition under the heading: An unforgettable day. Your
composition should be 80 — 120 words in length. In the composition, say:
* what happened, when, where

* how it happened, to whom, by whom, for whom, with whom

* how it ended

* what makes the day unforgettable.

2. Write a letter to a friend telling him/her two or three highlights (memorable
events and activities) of the term. The body of your letter should be 80 — 100
words in length. In your letter, say:

* the highlights one by one

* when, where and how they happened
* who were involved

* how they ended.

SECTION B COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15 MARKS)

You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.
(i) Comprehension (10 marks)
Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

Mlilo and Kembo

Two friends: Mlilg and Kembo were on a journey through a forest which had
wild animals. Mlilo said to his friend, “I'm afraid of wild animals. What'll we do if
we are attacked by some wild beasts?"



--- Page 144 ---
caine ce enteer te rete eA Ee ANA IE

Kembo answered, “we'll fight the beast together and defend one another.”
just then, a lion leapt from the bush and attacked Kembo who was walking in
front. Kembo fell to the ground, screaming with a lot of fear.

Without thinking of his own safety, Mlilo started pulling and twisting the lion's
tail. The lion must have felt some considerable pain in its tail as it suddenly left

Kembo and disappeared into the bushes.

“You have saved my life,” said Kembo to Miilo. “| thank you very much.”

Miilo replied, “It is my pleasure. I've only done what a good friend should do.”
the two friends were attacked again; this time by a
o, Kembo quickly climbed a tall tree

das the hippo brought Miilo down.

After another long walk,
hippo. As the huge beast charged at Miil
nearby. From the tall tree, Kembo watche

an. He lay flat like a dead person on the ground.

Miilo quickly thought of a pl
hippo left him and walked away.

Thinking Mlilo was dead, the

Then Kembo came down from the tall tree. Slowly he walked to Kembo, also
thinking he was dead. When he got close. Miilo got up. For the rest of the

journey, the two friends did not talk to one another.

Questions
1. What were the two friends doing in this story?

2. Who said that he was afraid of wild animals?

3. Which was the first animal that attacked the two friends?

4. How did Miilo save Kembo from the lion?

5: Why did the lion leave Kembo and disappear into the bushes?

6. Which was the second animal that attacked the two friends again?
7. What did Kembo do in the second attack?

8. How did Miilo save himself from the attacking hippo?

9. Of the two, who was a good friend and why?

10. Do you think Miilo ever trusted Kembo again and why?

(ii) Summary (5 marks)

In 30 words, write a summM
above..

You may make use of these notes if you wish:

* who Miilo and Kembo were
¢ what happened one day when the two were travelling.

ary of the story Mlilo and Kembo that you have read

cance teeter atmenere staat ar panseew> ~~



--- Page 145 ---
A learner wrote this poem about her new teacher. Listen carefully as one of you

reads the poem. Answer the questions below it and learn to recite the poem -

A poem to my teacher

| love my teacher:

The son of a local preacher,
Who teaches that man is God's creature
And that every person is part of nature.

My teacher is loving and kind,
Around him we alll find

Comfort and peace of mind,

But bad manners he does mind.

He's quiet and cool, |

Always telling us that no one is a fool. |
By not giving us any frightening rule, |
He makes us enjoy our time at school. :

Questions

Whose son is the teacher in the poem?

What does the teacher not like?

Why do the learners not fear to speak even when their teacher is near?
How has the teacher made learning a great pleasure?

Do you think the writer of this poem enjoys learning at school or not?

OA RWN >

In pairs, act out the dialogues on the next page.



--- Page 146 ---
2./(Do you mind if |
use your pencil?
| can't find mine.

Do you mind if |
open the window
next to you?

(Sorry, | do mind for
now. I'm still using it.
But | don't mind when
I'm done using it.

| fact you can open me
all the windows.

(a) From the two pictures above, answer these questions:
1. When one says, “I don’t mind,” is one saying, “Yes” or “No”?
2. When a person says, “I mind,” is one saying, “Yes” or “No”?

(b) Asking and answering politely using mind

In pairs, ask politely and answer one another by completing these:
Do you mind if
Would you mind to __.
| hope you do not mind if __ .
Will you mind if _.
Do your parents mind if .

aARwONT

Read the passage below fluently and clearly.

my ? The new classroom
At the beginning of the third term, the learners in Grade Five moved into
another classroom under a new lady teacher. This classroom looked like their old
classroom in many ways.

At first, the learners looked inside the new classroom from outside. Some looked
through the windows; others looked through the door which was open. The new
classroom looked good; showing that it had been well looked after.



--- Page 147 ---
etl ~~ Te _—

| Once inside, the learners started looking for places to sit. Then they all sat down, :

looking at their new teacher. Although the new teacher looked young, she was, :
: in fact a mother of three already. ,

The new teacher was looking her best. She told the class that she had: been
looking forward to meeting the learners in her new class. On hearing this, all the
learners looked happy. ;

When it was time to choose a new class prefect, the learners first looked around.
They were looking for a good prefect. They wanted a class prefect they could
! look to for good advice and leadership.

One learner suggested the name of Thabitha to be the prefect. When some
girls at the back laughed the learners looked behind to see who was laughing.
These girls seemed to look down on Thabitha. It always looks bad to look down
on anyone even when that someone does not look good enough.

Choose a word or phrase that has the same meaning as the underlined.
1. When mother is busy, | look after the baby.
| A. carry B. take care of C. feed D. take away
- 2. |look fo my big brother for protection.
A. turnto _ B. remember C. agreewith D. fight with
3. It is not right to look down on other people.

A. completely forget B. get rid of
C. think highly of D. think that you are better than
4. We all look forward to the trip to Lake Kariba.
A. feel happy about B. think carefully about
C. have memories of D. feel sorry about
5. When two people look alike, they are___ .
A. similar in appearance B. young looking

C. different in appearance D. like one another
| 6. The new teacher was looking her best.
A. very dirty and badly dressed B. quite old
C. well-dressed and smart D. very happy
7. The learners wanted a prefect they could look to.

| A. laugh at when he/she made mistakes
aid B. look at while they were sitting down

. C. hope and expect to get help from
D. knew very well

| 8. To look ahead is.to think about what ,
A. is likely to happen in the future B. happened in the past
C. is happening now D. is not likely to ever happen

Paki
g
“



--- Page 148 ---
wuueed of ear in words Bice fear ond clear
Say this sentence correctly after your teacher:
We hear through our ears.
Read these words aloud. The =<: in them have the same sound as in the word *=:".

spear appear smear dear rear dreary near dearly
disappear tears’ clear gear fearsome clearly tearing

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

1. That girl is looking her lost book.
A. in B. at C. for D. on
2. During the school holidays, | look my father’s cattle.
A. into B. after C. over D. around
3. |look to seeing you again next week.
A. out B. forward C. about D. on
4. When you walk through the forest, you must look for wild animals.
A. at B. over C. out D. back
5. lalways look my elder sister for god advice.
A. on B. at C. at D. to
6. I told my father my problem and he promised to look it.
A. on B. into C. around D. over
7. Today's weather looks __ for sports.
A. behind B. well: C. good D. ahead
8. Once my father makes a decision, he does not look
A. around B. again C. back D. away

ng Goth, aliang some

Read this paragraph:
) The farmer

Mrs Muzorodziis a farmer. She has two farms. Both farms are very large. She grows
both maize and.tobacco on both farms. She also keeps both dairy cows and
beef cattle on both farms. She sells all the milk she gets from all the dairy cows.
She uses some of the money from the milk sales to pay some of her workers. Both
men and women work on both farms. All the farm workers live on the two farms.



--- Page 149 ---
 ITTTTTzZXN_N- TS

Using the Paragraph you read on the Previous page, complete the sentences
below with the correct phrase from the brackets:

1. We use both for (one thing/two things).

2. Weuse all for (for everything in a group/two things ina group/part of a group).
3. We use some for (a part of a group/two things).

Complete the sentences below using beth, sare and =i.
1. | like sadza and brown rice.

the movie and the play were interesting.
their five children are obedient.

Davidzo and Anoziva can play clrums.

Only five players were at practice yesterday because
trip to Great Zimbabwe,

the twelve eggs hatched.

Not of the team's uniforms are clean since
washed last week.

8. Ihave five friends and | have invited

ak WN

had gone ona

OS

could not be

— five to my birthday party.

Practise good handwriting with the following letters and sentences writing quickly
at the same time. .

Pp Pp People say Paul and Peter are polite pupils.

Bb Bb Barnabas and his brother Ben were both born in Bikita.

Jj Jj Jonas and James went on an enjoyable journey in June.

Mm Mm My sister Miriam married Martin Munemo in May.

Ss Ss Susan and her sister Sarah will soon. visit us this summer season.

In 80 - 120 words, write a composition under the heading: The first day of term three.
Here are some ideas to help you:
* the day and date of the first day of term three; how the day began for you
yy * the teachers, the headteacher, how they were dressed, how they looked
‘ ii * the learners, your friends, your classmates
! * the school yard and its surroundings
i * the lessons, how the,school day ended for you.



--- Page 150 ---
Go outside with a short stick to draw and write on the ground. Listen carefully and
do what your teacher will tell you to do.

First part of the game

© Drawacircle round yourself and stand inside that circle.
¢ Face east.

* Markwith a large E on the circle where the east is.

* Make aright turn and stand facing the south.

* Mark with alarge S$ on the circle where the south is.

© Make another right turn and stand facing the west.

* Mark with alarge Won the circle where the west is.

* Make yet another right turn and stand facing the north.
* Mark with a large N on the circle where the north is.

Second part of the game

* While still standing inside the circle you have now marked:N E S W
* Stand facing half-way between the north and the east.

* Say: !am now facing north east.

* Mark NE on the circle where the north east is.

* ' Nowstand facing half-way between the south and the east.
e Say: lam now facing south east.

* Mark SE on the circle where the south east is.

* Nowstand facing half-way between the south and the west.
¢ Say:!am now facing south west.

* Mark SW on the circle where the south west is.

* Nowstand fa@ing half-way between the north and the west.
¢ Say: !am now facing north west.

* Mark NW on the circle where the north west is.

Draw a directions diagram like the one on the next page. Then complete it by
writing in full the directions marked 1 - 4.



--- Page 151 ---
Say which -iectan a Place is from where you are, for example, the borehole is to
the south west of our home.

In the same way, name the places that are:
to the north of the school

east of the school

to the south of the school

west of the school

north east of the school
south east of the school
south west of the school
north west of the schoo!

NOW
DxAA ND

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

OSS meet aseeene ee tenet ema t a tate “enh eaten bey ine wee oe oat nenae. amen Tt te a es oe

southern bordering

international domestic regional .
bungee-jumping flight - awesome massive wildlife

gorge heritage _ derives arrows

TT 8 Nmneteaee teteatntits tants Ae eer eee ene ttt cere cae we ee aL eee ee a are ea

Mr Takahashi visits Zimbabwe



--- Page 152 ---
Although he could have boarded a regional flight into Zimbabwe, Mr Takahashi
decided to travel by road. That would enable him to see the country side from
the southern border. .

As he travelled, Mr Takahashi made notes in his diary as follows:

10 July -

- travelled by road from Johannesburg, South Africa to the Gona-re-Zhou National
Park in the south eastern corner of Zimbabwe, bordering Mozambique and South
Africa. This area is rich in wildlife. Soent two days touring game reserve seeing
different wild animals there.

13 July - ,

-travelled by road to the Great Zimeabwe Monuments near Masvingo, the oldest
city in Zimbabwe. The country derives its name from this wonderful heritage site
made up of massive stone walls. :

15 July
-travelled by road to Mutare, also known as the Eastern Gateway into Zimbabwe.
Spent the next three days seeing and sometimes climbing up the scenic
Chimanimani and Nyanga Mountains, both parts of the Eastern Highlands. Saw
the wonderful Mutarazi Falls which are the highest waterfalls in Zimbabwe. The
falls are over seven hundred metres high. .



--- Page 153 ---
T nn ee Nee
I 18 July

| -travelled by road to Harare, Zimbabwe's capital city, sometimes referred to as
the Sunshine City because of its warm and pleasant. climate.

The map below shows (with arrows) how Mr Takahashi travelled in Zimbabwe.

Zambia

Nyamapanda
Eastern Highlands

Mozambique
National Park™

Botswana

Gona-reZhou
National Park

19 July

Harare International Airport, Harare
Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo International Airport, Byo
Joshua Mgabuko Nkomo International Airport, Byo
Victoria Falls International Airport, Victoria Falls

0845 hr

Spent two days at the awesome Victoria Falls, one of the famous natural wonders
of the world, known in the local language as Mosi-oa-tunya; which means the
‘smoke that thunders’. Enjoyed bungee-jumping from the Victoria Falls Bridge
down into the deep gorge of the.Zambezi River.

me.

21 July

-flew on aregional flight to the Oliver Tambo International Airportin Johannesburg,
South Africa from where | boarded an international flight back to Japan. It was
an unforgettable trip.



--- Page 154 ---
Cc

FWON>

no

ot DL. x
i se

ORO RAEI

omplete these sentences.

The International Airport is in Johannesburg, South Africa.

The International Airport is in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe.

The Gona-re-Zhou National Park is in the of Zimbabwe,
Because of its warm and pleasant climate Harare is sometimes referred to
as the .
is sometimes known as the Eastern Gateway into Zimbabwe.
Bulawayo is also known as the _ because it was founded by King
Lobengula.

The Victoria Falls are known in the local language, as Mosi-oa-tunya, which
means , )

The country Zimbabwe derives its name from the _.

In some words o has a short a sound, for example, some, love

Say this sentence correctly after the teacher:

My brother saw a dozen monkeys on the tree.

The underlined o has ashorta sound.

Say the following words correctly. The underlined o has a short « sound.

cover love © money shovel = government gloves stomach
none worry company comfort wonderful front accompany
onion son Menday someone colour even won

tons another honey above mother

~~
Sectves of direction

The city of Mutare is the eastern gateway into Zimbabwe.

Note: by adding -ern to the noun east, we have formed the adjective eastern.
From the passage, find out where the Gona-re-Zhou National Park is. Notice how
the adjective from south east is formed and written.

Rewrite these sentences with the adjectives formed from the directions in brackets.
Beitbridge is on Zimbabwe's (south) border with South Africa. :
The Hwange National Park is in Zimbabwe's (north west) region.

1.
2.



--- Page 155 ---
Nyamapanda is on Zimbabwe's (north- east) border with Mozambique.
Botswana is Zimbabwe's (west) neighbour,

Mozambique is Zimbabwe's (east) neighbour.

Zambia is Zimbabwe's (north) neighbour.

The Victoria Falls are near Zimbabwe's (north-west) border with Zambia and
Namibia.

The aeroplane from Harare to Bulawayo flies in a (south-west) direction.

NSO

©o

ol 2g using adverbs
Say this sentence to the Class: .
* | was born earlier than the point in time when yOu were born. (13 words)

_ This sentence can be summarized as follows:

° | was born before you were born. (7 words)
Note that these two sentences mean exactly the same.

Summarize the sentences below by replacing the underlined phrases with the
adverbs from the box below:

always never
immediately seldom quite

soon often sometimes
already indeed
The president of the country is on every occasion guarded.

We get most of our rainfall in summer and, on very few occasions, in winter.

To the people of Zimbabwe, Lake Kariba is very important ina big way.
Foreign tourists on v ny occasions visit our country.

When | got to the station, the bus had left oOefore | arrived.

Although he was not a rich man, he was living fairly but not very happily.

We are in Grade Five: and within a short period of time we will be in Grade Six.
Did you know that at no time in the past, present or future does it rain on the

moon?
When he was ordered to go away, he left ve ic without any delay.

very quickly and without any delay
. Joseph on some occasions, but not always goes to school by bicycle.
PE ee |

ONAOKRWH —

— oO
o-

ose
Ay ‘i
Ws

srerer y coampasition frory, notes

Imagine that you were Mr Takahashi, the Japanese tourist who travelled to
Zimbabwe. In 80 ~ 120 words, write a@ composition Under the heading An
unforgettable trip. Make uge of the notes made during the trip and use words like
first day, second day, third day, fourth day...twelfth day, etc.



--- Page 156 ---
airport

Learn to recite this poem pointing to the directions that you mention.
To and from school

Every morning

We meet at school.

Some come from the north; others from the south.

Some come from the east; others from the west.

Some come from the north east; others from the south west.
Some come from the north west; others from the south east.

Then, every afternoon,

We return to our homes.

Some go to the north; others to the south.

Some go to the east; others to the west.

Some go to the north east; others to the south west.
Some go to the north west; others to the south east.

Answer these questions giving the right directions from other known places in the
area.

Where is your school? -

Where is your home?

Where is the hospital?

Where is the police station?

POND

Write the plurals of the following compound nouns.
classmate rainforest wildfire stepbrother bathroom
motor-car | weekend policeman paperbag shoelace

storeroom shopkeeper signpost



--- Page 157 ---
note of the spr sound.

Read this poem and answer the questions that follow. Take
Learn to recite the poem.

I love spring

From the time | was a child,

| always enjoyed

The pleasant spring weather:

Especially when there was a sprinkle

Of a light rain shower spraying the gardens.
Just like our garden sprinkler.

Even now | still enjoy to sprawl

On the green spring grass;

Watching the new leaves sprout,

On the spruced plants in the gardens,
And the animals as they sprint with speed;
Or the birds flying with wings spread out

In their mating spring spree.

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

Sophia on the bus

- agricultural empty elderly Roadport stretched _ pleasure
volume incoming -course squeezing trouping excuse |



--- Page 158 ---
Last weekend, Sophia was travelling to fown on a bus carrying many passengers.
She sat between two passengers: cin elderly man and a woman.

-

Instead of squeezing herself on this seat, Sophia said to the two passengers, “May
| please sit with you, if you don't mind?"

The two passengers replied, “Of course you may.”

“Thank you very much,” said Sophia as she took her seat between the two. The
man who sat on the window side of Sophia was playing some loud music on his
cellphone handset. It was hot inside. Sophia noticed that the window next to the
man was closed.

Sophia said to the man, “Do you mind opening that window please! I’m feeling
very hot.”

The man answered, “With pleasure” as he stretched out his hand to open the
window.

Once more Sgphia said, “Oh, thank you very much. | was beginning to sweat
already." .

The man answered, “You're welcome,” as he continued to listen to his loud music.

Just then there was a ringing tone for an incoming call on Sophia's cellphone.
Sophia turned to the man and asked, “Could you please lower the volume of the
music so that | may take the call.”

Instead of just lowering the volume, the man switched off the music. When Sopn'ca
was through with her call, she said to the man, “Thank you very much.”

=

a



--- Page 159 ---
The man answered, “You're welcome,’ and then he switched on his loud music
again.

. Then Sophia asked, "Excuse me; would you know how far we still are from town?
Do we still have a long way to travel?”

The woman answered, "I'm sorry | too don't know. I’m travelling on this road for
the first time.”

The man said, “We should get into town within the next five minutes; unless we
are stopped somewhere.” .

“Oh, thank you very much, Sir." said Sophia. “Do you happen to know the name
of the station in town where this bus Will park?" *

The man answered, “The bus will park at the Roadport Bus Station along Fourth
Street.”

Sophia said to the man, “Oh thank yOu so much, Sir. You've been very kind and
helpful to me. | really don't know what | 'd have done without your help.”

The man said, “Don't mention! It's a pleasure to help others just as it's also fo
pleasure to get help from others.”

When the bus arrived at the Roadport Bus Station, the passengers started trouping
out. Sophia waited for the elderly people to get out first.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

1. What are the people travelling by bus called?

2. Where was Sophia going?

3. Where did Sophia sit in the bus?

4. Why was Sophia beginning to sweat in the bus?

5. Where was the bus going to park in town?

6. Would you say the man who sat next to Sophia was helpful or unhelpful?

7. What should a polite young passenger do on getting out of the bus?

8. Why do you think Sophia waited for the elderly people to get out of the bus
first?

The sentence below is reported or indirect speech:
* Sophia asked fora place to sit.

The sentence below is direct speech or the actual spoken words:
* Sophia asked, “May | please sit with you, if you don't mind.”



--- Page 160 ---
Rewrite the following sentences in direct speech with the quotation marks, capital
letters, commas, full stops or question marks where they should be. See examples

in the story: Sophia on the bus.

1. Sophia asked the man if he did not mind opening the window. She said that
she was feeling very hot.
Sophia asked the man, “___

2. Sophia asked the man if he could lower down the volume of the music.
Sophia asked the man, “ TT”

3. My new classmate said that his name was John.
My new classmate said, * aa

4. Our teacher said that she did not want lazy learners in her class.
Our teacher said, “ ”

5. The teacher asked me why | was always late for school.

The teacher asked me, “ ”

6. Mother said that she did not want children who were impolite.

7. Paul asked me what day it was.

8. | told Paul that it was Thursday.

When we speak, we shorten some words. When we write the shortened words, we
out an apostrophe in place of the letters that have been left out.

Example: “May | please sit with you here, if you don't mind?”

Note: don't is the short form of do not. The 0 is left out and an apostrophe is put in
place of the o.

Rewrite the following sentences joining the underlined words and using the
: apostrophe:
Maria said, “Lam now in Grade Five.”
“! cannot ride a bicycle,” Peter told the class.
“This is not time to play games,” said the teacher to us.
"Jane did not.come to school yesterday,” | told the teacher.
Thomas said, “Our new teacher does not know my name yet.”
“It is not my fault,” Thomas told his father.
People should not cut down trees or burn grass.
Maria said that she will come to see me tomorrow.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Using can and may
1. Use can:



--- Page 161 ---
= _— —_

- — a

(a) to say that you have the ability to do something
Example: | can ride a bicycle.
(6) to say that one is allowed to do something, or has the right or power to do
something |
Example: Only adult residents can vote in the elections.
(c) to say that something is possible or that it might happen
Example: You can succeed in life if you work hard.
(d) in a request, or to offer help, advice and suggestions
Example: Can you please tell me the time?

Use may:
(a) to say that something is possible, true or will probably happen
Example: The careless driver may have caused the accident.
(b) to ask or state whether something is allowed
Example: May | go with you to town, please?
You may go and rest now.

Write five sentences in which you use can and five sentences in which you use
may.

Practise good handwriting with the following letters and words: writing quickly at
the same time. _

Ff Ff Farmer Frank has a farm not. far from Fairfields.

Kk Kk Kelvin and Kenny are keen to know whe kicked the bucket.
Rr Rr Round and round the rugged rocks Rudolph and Ronnie ran.
Dd Dd _ Did David do what he did with dirty hands?

Hh Hh Henry Hove had his own house in Harare.

Write a composition about a day in which you made three polite requests. Say:

* what you were doing, when, where, how

* the polite requests you made and to whom

* the replies you got.

Remember to use quotation marks and other punctuation marks correctly. Your
composition should be between 80-100 words.

Fl



--- Page 162 ---
Andrew wrote the poem below to recite on his mother’s birthday, which is a special

day in the family.

Read the poem and learn to recite it.

Happy birthday mother

Without you mother,

| would not have been there.

You carried me for nine long months,
And brought me into this world.
When | had no teeth to chew food,
You knew when to breastfeed me.
You changed my dirty nappies.
What a special gift from God you're!
Forever cheerful and caring,
Understanding and loving.

Happy birthday to you, mother.

| wish you many more!

ry

Say the following words correctly:

grew threw view
sewage brewery spewing
few sewer mew

crew
news
ewe

brew
dew
flew



--- Page 163 ---
a ol eratrct ns
mE COTHP Es

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence below.

a Seem omeneneenanane wetnenneeitet een raises am neb cases

Te Rete om per tteeneertaneen,

mew sewer news brewery — stew few dew ewe

Tears rt tne am eranappnnen

orm on the grass or on the ground

is the small drops of water that f

at night.

Beer is brewed ata

A female sheep is called a
Cats

A dish made.by cooking vegetables and meat in liquid isa
The word means ‘not many’.
The information about something that has happened recently is

2

3

4. .

SA isan Underground pipe that carries sewage.
6

7

8

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

The anniversary

+ eee . to nae teenie tenet
independent movements aspirations objectives organization
celebration support colonialism liberation anniversary

cooperate operating formerly movements

TOT acne nae tetene A ae eee eee

The twenty-fifth of May is a special day in Africa as a whole. It is the anniversary
of the founding of the African Union, formerly known as the Organisation of the
African Union. It is a public holiday in Zimbabwe and other African countries

The African Union is an inter-state organisation or grouping of African states who
share common objectives and aspirations. It was formed on the twenty-fifth of
May in the year 1963 by thirty-two African states that were independent then.
The main objective df the OAU was to reject colonialism and to assist the African
countries that were still under colonial rule to fight for their independence.



--- Page 164 ---
=

Kwame Nkrumah Sekou Toure ~

Some of the founding fathers of the OAU were Tanzania's President Julius
Nyerere, Ghana's President Kwame Nkrumah, Guinea's President Sekou Toure
and Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda. The formation of the OAU also enabled
the liberation movements to come together and cooperate in the fight against
colonialism. * :

During the war of liberation, the freedom fighters received a lot of support from the
Organization of African Unity (COAU), now known as the African Union (AU). The
OAU member states gave active support and bases to the liberation movements.
Zimbabwe's liberation movements and their leaders like Herbert Chitepo, Joshua
Nkomo, Robert Mugabe, Jason Moyo, Josiah Tongogara and many others were
operating from bases in Zambia, Mozambique, Tanzania and Botswana. That
explains why in Zimbabwe we celebrate Africa Day on the twenty-fifth of May
every year as a public holiday.



--- Page 165 ---
Answer the questions below in full, correct sentences.

When do the people of Africa celebrate the anniversary of the African Union?
What was the main objective of the Organisation of the African Unity?

How did the African Union assist the liberation war fighters of Zimbabwe?
Name any two of the founding fathers of the African Union.

Why do we celebrate Africa Day in Zimbabwe?

Name any three of Zimbabwe's nationalist leaders in the fight against
colonialism.

Which African. countries gave bases to Zimbabwe's liberation movement?
What is an anniversary?

SO RWN >

co N

Complete the following sentences with the coirect words.

1 oA country is one that rules itself and makes its own decisions.

A. dependent B. sovereign
C. colonial D. founding
2. We say that something is when it lasts a long time.
A. uniformed: B. bitter
C. public D. prolonged

3. The are most of the people or things within a group.
A. majority B. grouping C. common D. movements .
4. The are the people or things that are less than half within that group.

A. rulers B. forces C. minority D. members
5. At school, we do the of the National Flag during morning
assembly.
A. marching B. hoisting C. jumping D. singing
6. The African Union is an . of member states with shared objectives.
A. organization B. celebration
C. objective D. independence
7. The things that you would like to achieve are your
A. activities  B. states C. lives D. objectives
8. The things that you strongly wish to do or to have in future are your
A. entertainment B. aspirations
C. parade D. movements
9. The system in which one country rules another country is called
A. independence B. colonialism

C. liberation’ D. nationalist

oe.
$0
4

“AI



--- Page 166 ---
10. We say people whien they work together to achieve something.
A. fight B. celebrate C. reject D. cooperate

Example: Zimbabwe became independent in the year 1980.
Note: By adding the prefix in- we have formed the new word independent which

is the opposite of dependent.

Change the sentences below to mean the opposite by adding the prefix i”~ to the
underlined words: ,

The reply he gave to my question was correct.

The teacher refused to mark the composition that was complete.

Some wild fruits are edible.

The animals were visible in the darkness.

The crying girl said some words that were audible.

| took the direct route to the shops.

The time we were allowed to write the examination was adequate.

The rains that fell in our area were significant.

CONAORWN >

rubs

Example: Zimbabwe gained its independence in the year 1980.

The word independence is the abstract noun formed from the adjective
independent.

An abstract noun is the name of a thing that cannot be touched. It refers to a
quality, an idea or a concept.

Say the abstract nouns from these adjectives. You may use the dictionary.

violent patient — innocent obedient defend excellent
silent impertant present distant ignorant absent

violent confident abundant vigilant arrogant __ intelligent

Write an informal letter inviting a friend to a special day at your family home. Your
letter should be 80-100 words in length. In the letter, say: (not necessarily in the
same order) 4



--- Page 167 ---
what you will be celebrating on the special day

day, date, and venue of the celebrations

the time the celebrations will start

who else you have invited to the celebrations

what you have prepared for the special day

what you would like the friend to bring or to prepare to do on.the day.

&

Read this story and answer the questions thai follow.
Zimbabwe's liberation wars

Zimbabwe's liberation wars against the British white settlers: known as
Chimurenga in Shona and Umvukela in Ndebele can be divided into two:
the first and the second. In the first Chimurenga/Umvukela, the blacks
were resisting the take-over of their lands by the British white settlers. King
Lobengula, Murenga, Mbuya Nehanda and Sekuru Kaguvi were some of the
leaders of the first Chimurenga/Umvukela. The first Chimurenga/Umvukela
ended in defeat for the blacks by the better armed white settlers.

In the second war of liberation, the blacks took Up arms to fight for their rights
and freedom as well as for the end of racism and colonialism. This time the
blacks were better armed with modern weapons to match those of the settlers.
The liberation war fighters also received a lot of support from the blacks inside
the country. The second war of liberation resulted in the independence of
Zimbabwe.

Answer the questions below in full, correct sentences.

What are the local names given to Zimbabwe's liberation wars?
Name two of the leaders of the first Chimurenga/Umvukela.

What were the blacks fighting for in the first Chimurenga/Umvukela?
. Why did the first liberation war end in defeat for the blacks?

. Why did the blacks fight in the second war of liberation?

. What brought about the independence of Zimbabwe?

. Explain what ‘to be bétter armed’ means.

. Who are referred to as ‘the settlers’ in this story?

ONAnARWH —

Te nee cmveens ene —eenaen arenas reer eeepenteenet ete ee pany nee se ooo



--- Page 168 ---
Look at the second paragraph in Zimbabwe's liberation wars on the previous
page. Afterwards the teacher will dictate that paragraph while you write it neatly
and quickly.

Research on the African Union. In two minutes tell the class about the African
Union.

¢ what it is;

¢ when it was formed and what for

« some of its founding fathers

« how it helped the people of Zimbabwe.



--- Page 169 ---
i

: ‘speak ©

Listen carefully as the teacher reads the following Passage to you. Answer the
questions that follow.

: Pes

The Olympic Games

The latest venues for the summer Olympics were as follows:

The athletes travel to the venues by air. While at the Olympics, the athletes can
easily communicate with the people back in their different countries through
@-mails or computer messages. People all over the world can also watch
and follow the events at the Olympics on television. The fast air transport, the
computer and the television have changed the world into a global village.
The world is now a global village because the people of the whole world are
now inter-connected.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

What is the name given to the largest sporting event of the world?

How often are the Olympics held?

Which three things have made the world a global village?

What is the name given to the messages passed through computers?
What do we mean when we say that the world is now a global Village?
Where were the most recent Olympics held?

Which country hosted the most recent Olympics?

How do the athletes travel to the Olympics?

PNAXORWNH—



--- Page 170 ---
TE a summary

in 30 words write a summary of the passage: The Olympic Games. You may make
use of the following guidelines if you wish: :

« what the Olympics are

* how often they are staged

* what makes the Olympics truly global

* where the most recent and/or the next Olympics will be staged.

Read this passage and answer the cvestions that follow.

World Cup Soccer in South Africa

popular tournament _ interncitional staged

referees eliminated

participated hosted extra dead-locked knocked nil
handled quarter-finals scorecl finalists defeating millions
viewers oceans global

Football or soccer is one of the most popular global games. Today there are
national soccer teams for men as well as for women throughout the world. The first
world cup soccer tournament was played in 1930 when the then FIFA president,
jules Rimet, decided to stage an international football tournament. From then
on, the world cup soccer tournaments have been staged after every four years
in different countries of the world.

The first and only world cup soccer tournament on African soil to date was
hosted by South Africa. This was from the eleventh of June to the eleventh of
July 2010. Seven hundred and thirty-six players from thirty-two different countries
participated,jn a total of sixty-four matches handled by twenty-nine referees.
Brazil, Germdny, England, France, Italy, Argentina and Portugal were some of
the countries. African countries that also took part but did not reach the finals
were Nigeria, Ghana, Algeria, lvory Coast, Cameroon as well as the host country
which was knocked out in the group stage.

Many people from all over the world travelled to South Africa to watch these
football matchés. Many others watched the different matches on television in
the comfort of their homes.



--- Page 171 ---
and speak

Listen carefully as the teacher reads the following passage to you. Answer the
questions that follow.

The Olympic Games

Once in every four years, athletes from all over the world come together
to compete in a variety of games known as the Olympic Games or just the
Olympics. The modern Olympics are the largest international sporting event.
The latest venues for the summer Olympics were as follows:

China
Great Britain

The athletes travel to the venues by air. While at the Olympics, the athletes can
easily communicate with the people back in their different countries through
e-mails or computer messages. People all over the world can also watch
and follow the events at the Olympics on television. The fast air transport, the
computer and the television have changed the world into a global village.
The world is now a global village because the people of the whole world are
now inter-connected. :

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.

ONAMRON—

What is the name given to the largest sporting event of the world?
How often are the Olympics held?

Which three things have made the world a global village?

What is the name given to the messages passed through computers?
What do we mean when we say that the world is now a global village?
Where were the most recent Olympics held?

Which country hosted the most recent Olympics?

How do the*athletes travel to the Olympics?



--- Page 172 ---
In 30 words write a summary of the passage: The Olympic Games. You may make
use of the following guidelines if you wish:

¢ what the Olympics are

* howoften they are staged

* what makes the Olympics truly global

* where the most recent and/or the next Olympics will be staged.

Read this passage and answer the questions that follow.

World Cup Soccer in South Africa

popular tournament _ interncitional staged referees eliminated

participated hosted extra dead-locked knocked nil
handled quarter-finals scorecl finalists defeating millions
viewers oceans global

Football or soccer is one of the most popular global games. Today there are
national soccer teams for men as well as for women throughout the world. The first
world cup soccer tournament was played in 1930 when the then FIFA president,
Jules Rimet, decided to stage an international football tournament. From then
on, the world cup soccer tournaments have been staged after every four years
in different countries of the world.

The first and only world cup soccer tournament on African soil to date was
hosted by South Africa. This was from the eleventh of June to the eleventh of
July 2010. Seven hundred and thirty-six players from thirty-two different countries
participated an @ total of sixty-four matches handled by twenty-nine referees.
Brazil, Germdny, England, France, Italy, Argentina and Portugal were some of
the countries. African countries that also took part but did not reach the finals
were Nigeria, Ghana, Algeria, lvory Coast, Cameroon as well as the host country
which was knocked out in the group stage.

Many people from all over the world travelled to South Africa to watch these
football matches. Many others watched the different matches on television in
the comfort of their homes.



--- Page 173 ---
ill |

The matches were played in nine host cities around South Africa. The opening
match was played at the Soccer C i

host cities were Durban, Pretoria, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Bloemfontein,
Rustenburg, Nelspruit and Polokwane.

English referee, Howard Webb refereed the final match in which the two finalists
were dead-locked at nil-nil at the end of the regulation ninety minutes of play.
The game went into extra time. In the twenty-sixth minute of extra time, Andries
Iniesta scored the winning goal for Spain, defeating the Netherlands.

The table below shows the prize money paid to the teams that took part in the
2010 tournament:

Prize money

Team category
To each of the 16 teams eliminated at the group stage

To each of the 8 teams eliminated in the round of 16
remaining teams

To each of the 4 teams eliminated in the quarter-finals stage
To the fourth placed team

To the third placed team

To the runner up/the losing finalist

To the winning team of the tournament

US$ 8 million

US$ 9 million

Today, millions of television viewers continue to watch their favourite soccer
teams play in distant countries, making football a truly global sport.

= iese— 5



--- Page 174 ---
1.

Select the correct answers to the questions below.

Who was Jules Rimet?

A. Asoccer referee. B. A football player.

Cc. Apresident of FIFA. D. Asoccer host in South Africa.
The world cup soccer tournament is staged .

A. after every four years B. only in South Africa

C. once every year D. ‘only in Africa

To date, South Africa is the only African country that has ____-_--_—

A. hosted the world cup soccer tournament

B. played in the world cup soccer tournament

C. won the world cup soccer tournament

D. not played in the world cup soccer tournament
How many national soccer teams participated in the 2010 world cup soccer
tournament?

A. sixteen B. thirty-two

C. twenty-nine D. seven hundred and thirty-six

How many African countries took part in the world cup soccer tournament that
was hosted by South Africa in 2010?

A. five B. none C. thirty-two D. six

The world cup soccer tournament is a global event because .

A. it was started in 1930

B. itis popular in South Africa alone

C. soccer is also known as football

D. itis watched by people from all over the world

in the world cup soccer tournament that was played in 2010, South Africa

- A. won US$ 8 million prize money

B. failed to win any prize money

C. played in the finals and lost

D. won US$14 million prize money

Which team won US$24 million prize money in the world cup soccer tournament
that was played in 201 0?

A. Brazil , 8B. South Africa C. Netherlands D. Spain

For whieh couniry did Andries Iniesta play in the 9010 world cup soccer
tournament?

A. Germany B. Spain C. South Africa D. Netherlands

. ming opposites using ie prefix in-

(i)

Look at this example: Something is accurate when it is correct in every deta’
and without any mistakes.



--- Page 175 ---
The matches were played in nine host cities around South Africa. The opening
match was played at the Soccer City Stadium in Johannesburg. The other
host cities were Durban, Pretoria, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Bloemfontein,
Rustenburg, Nelspruit and Polokwane.

English referee, Howard Webb refereed the final match in which the two finalists
were dead-locked at nil-nil at the end of the regulation ninety minutes of play.
The game went into extra time. In the twenty-sixth minute of extra time, Andries
Iniesta scored the winning goal for Spain, defeating the Netherlands.

The table below shows the prize money paid to the teams that took part in the
2010 tournament:

US$ 8million —

US$ 9 million

Today, millions of television viewers continue to watch their favourite soccer
teams play in distant countries, making football a truly global sport.

Team category
To each of the 16 teams eliminated at the group stage

To each of the 8 teams eliminated in the round of 16
remaining teams

To each of the 4 teams eliminated in the quarter-finals stage
To the fourth placed team

To the third placed team

To the runner up/the losing finalist

To the winning team of the tournament

es



--- Page 176 ---
Select the correct answers fo the questions below.
1. Who was Jules Rimet?

A. Asoccer referee. B. A football player.

C. Apresident of FIFA. D. Asoccer host in South Africa.
2. The world cup soccer tournament is staged .

A. after every four years B. only in South Africa

Cc. once every year D. ‘only in Africa

3. To date, South Africa is the only African country that has .
A. hosted the world cup soccer tournament
B. played in the world cup soccer tournament
C. won the world cup soccer tournament
D. not played in the world cup soccer tournament
4. How many national soccer teams participated in the 2010 world cup soccer

tournament?
A. sixteen B. thirty-two
C. twenty-nine D. seven hundred and thirty-six

5. Howmany African countries took part in the world cup soccer tournament that
was hosted by South Africa in 2010?
A. five B. none C. thirty-two D. six
6. The world cup soccer tournament is a global event because
A. it was started in 1930
B. it is popular in South Africa alone
C. soccer is also known as football
D. itis watched by people from all over the world
7. In the world cup soccer tournament that was played in 2010, South Africa

. A. won US$ 8 million prize money
B. failed to win any prize money
C. played in the finals and lost
D. won US$14 million prize money
8. Which team won US$24 million prize money in the world cup soccer tournament
that was played in 2010?
A. Brazil » B. South Africa C. Netherlands D. Spain
9. For which country did Andries Iniesta play in the 2010 world cup soccer
tournament?
A. Germany 8B. Spain C. South Africa D. Netherlands

-ocming opposites using the prefix in-

(i) Look at this example: Something is accurate when it is correct in every detail
and without any mistakes.



--- Page 177 ---
Something is inaccurate when it is not correct in eve

Complete the statements below in the same way.

I. Something is audible when it is loud enough for people to hear.
Something is inaudible when .

2. Someone is capable when he or she is able to do something.
Someone is incapable when .

3. Astory or the news is credible when it it can be believed or trusted.
A story or the news is incredible when

-_..

. . e eee
4. A fruit is edible when it is safe or good encugh to be eaten.
A fruit is inedible when

5. A worker ora machin
results,
A worker or a'machine is inefficient when
6. A person is eligible when he/she is allowed
something e.g. voting, becoming a teacher etc
A person is ineligible when he/she .
7. Things are sufficient when they are €nough or as much as is needed.
Things are insufficient when _ .
8. Things are formal when they are official: therefore not ona friendly or relaxed
basis.
Things are informal when ="
9. A person or Country is dependent when controlled by another.
A person or country is independent when.
10. Something is defensible when it can be defended.
Something is indefensible when

ee
(ii) Using in- like in the examples above, say the opposites of these words:
adequate convenient correct direct distinct experienced
frequent separable significant valiq Visible tolerable
gratitude expensive competent cornplete

(iii) Afterwards Prepare to say to the class your Own two sentences similar to the
sentences in (i) above with any of the words above.

ry detail or has some mistakes.

€ Is efficient when it is working well and producing good

by the rules and laws to do

JHU sentances using because, alfic vgh and but
Say the following sentences to the class:

* John was late for school. The teacher was not happy with John.
We can join the two sentences above as follows: :

* The teacher was not happy with John because he was late for school.
Another example:

* The teacher was not happy with John. He did not punish John.

We can:say the twa,sentences above as one sentence in two different ways as
follows:

(a) The teacher was not happy with John although he did not punish him.



--- Page 178 ---
(b) The teacher was not happy with John but did not punish him.
Use because, although or but to join the following pairs of sentences correcily.

Jack is taller than Paul. Jack is younger than Paul. (although)

| missed the early bus. | got up cite. (because)

| visited my friend's house. | did not find him. (buf)

The land is already dry. It rained last week. (although)

| send him many short messages. He never replies. (but)

| could not go on the school trip. | had no bus fare. (because)

We grew up together. We have never been good friends. (but)

The cake did not come out very well. He followed the recipe that he was

given. (although)

9. Wecouldnot go to play with the others. We had choir practice that afternoon.
(but)

10. The doctor tried calling the patient's relatives. She did not get a response. (but)

OANAARWN >

tos

Listen carefully and say this sentence correctly after your teacher:

On Christmas day, the people whistled as they watched a wrestling match. Did you
notice that the bold and underlined tis silent?

Now say the following words correctly. The ‘in them in each of the words is silent.

whistling listening fastening _ rustling nestling hastening often
catch watch fetch fasten butcher bouquet depot
switch sofien rustle castle jostle hatch Christmas

crutches hasten whistle

A narrative composition is one in which you tell the story of what happened.
Write a narrative composition under the heading An international football match |
watched. = ~ ,

which two countries were playing,

where and when the football match was played

the colours of the team jerseys

the spectators: numbers, what they were doing

the game itself: how it was played, what the players did, the referee
outstanding players, what they did and how they did it

the scores at half-time; at the end of the match,

what you think about the game/match.



--- Page 179 ---
English Paper 1

Time: | hour 30 minutes

(Total marks: 40)
"Read the letter below and answer the questions that follow.

Vengere Primary School
P O Box 187

Rusape

18 October 2017

The School Head
Rujeko Primary School
P © Box DY30
Dangamvura

Mutare

Dear Sir/Madam

RE: APPLICATION FOR A GRADE SIX VACANCY AT YOUR SCHOOL

| hereby apply for a Grade Six
year.

place at your schoo! beginning in January next

lam an honest and hard-wo

rking girl aged ten. This year | am in Grade Five
at the school named above.

My parents have bought a house in the suburb where your school is. Our
family will relocate to that new house during the December school holidays.

That is way lam applying to become one of the learners at your school when
the next school year begins. :

| lam very good at practical subjects. Last term | was awarded merit prizes

In Agriculture and Home Economics. My other favourite subjects are Science
and Mathematics.



--- Page 180 ---
_ When Phillipa Mhlanga wrote this letter, she was

|am also very good at sports. | play in the school netball team. | also play tennis
and volley. ball. In addition to that, | sing in the school choir.

My father and mother are both self-employed; the former being a vendor and
the latter a cross-border trader. Together they earn enough money to be able

to pay all the school-fees for me and for the other children as well as buy all
the uniforms for all of us.

1 look forward to your favourable reply.

Yours faithfully

Phillipa Mhlanga

_ Which word in the letter means the same as the word ‘vacancy’?

A. Head B. Learner C. Place D. Grade

. Phillipa Mhlanga wrote this letter

A. from Rujeko School

B. from Vengere School

C. during the month of December
D. in the month of January

A. only ten years old

B. in grade six.

C. already living in Dangamvura
D. not going to school.

_ Which of Phillioa Mhlanga’s parents was a cross-border trader?

A. Her father.

- B. Her mother.

C. Neither her father nor her mother.
D. Both her father and mother.

. What is a suburb?

A. Abig city.,

B. -Aschool with many learners.

C. Ansarea outside a city with people's houses.
D. Aplace just across the border.

_ Which word in the letter means ‘a group of people singing together’?

A. grade B. sports C. subject D. choir

What shows us that Phillipa really wanted to become a learner at Rujeko
Primary?

A. She was good at practical subjects.

B. Her parents were able to pay all the fees.

C. She was looking forward to a favourable reply.

D. She was an honest and hard-working girl.



--- Page 181 ---
190 hte pene py,

ANAS eaten Fan eect Os ee eee temeeey

Choose one word with the same meaning as the underlined,
8. The Prophet Mohammed founded the religion Islam.

A. believed . B. prayed C. startec -D. taught
9. Lake Kariba is q huge man-made dam on the Z

ambezi river
A. giant B. modern C. useful D. famous
10. When all the Passengers were seated, the bus departed.
A. arrived —B._ left C. turned D. stopped
11. With all those dark Clouds in the

sky, | was certain that it was going to rain.
A. afraid B. doubting C. sure D

- remembering

Choose the correct Preposition to fill in the gap.
12. Nowadays most People like to travel —___ air.

A. on B. in C. by D. above
13. Many People are afraid snakes.

A. with ~B. for C. from D. of
14. | was watching asthe boys jumped the river and began to swim

across.

in B. into C. to D. over

Choose one word that means the same as the underlined phrase. .

15. In the accident, the bus jurned over many times,
A. overturned B. collided

C. reversed D. damaged

16. Zimbabwe is visited by many people who travel to see places on holiday.
A. travellers B. foreigners —C. visitors D. tourists
17. That boy failed Grade Five last year and is now doi i i

rr
A. learning BB. repeating

C. correcting DD. working
Read this Passage and answer the questions that follow.

n.

The motorist who needed help

A fisherman was crossing the highway, heaclin

there. Hesawa young motorist who loo
beside his car i

g for the river to do some fishing

ked s‘randed. The motorist was standing
n the middle of the busy, wide road.

“Hello!” the fisherman said. “I'm here to help you, so don't worry. My name is
Jacob.” One rear tyre. of*the car was flat and damaged beyond repair. The
car had been driven with a flat tyre over a long distance.



--- Page 182 ---
ace ene penta eens cectenamgy enepmesnanaeewte cs pean ansnncntgi gine aI S AE tae ata a TEE RBS GRETA SES pee ee een ereceriae teens timer sttese pce emmy Geman mat! ot tarareey memamsee ot 8

Jacob knelt down beside the car cind got busy. While replacing the damaged
wheel, he got very dirty. When the job was done, the young motorist asked
Jacob how much he owed him for his help.

Jacob-smiled and said, “If you really want to pay me, the next time you see
someone who needs help, give that person the needed assistance.” Then he
walked away.

18. What is a highway?
A. A busy, wide road. B. A big river.
C. Arobbery. D. Along way.
19. Which word tells us that the young motorist was in a situation from which he

could not get away?
We say that person is

A. frightened 3. stranded

C. worried D. calm .
- 20. Why did the young motorist look worried on seeing the fisherman?

A. He was not a fisherman. 8. His car had a flat tyre.

C. He feared being robbed. D. He was a young driver.
21. Who was Jacob in this story? |
A. Another motorist. B. Arobber on the highway.
C. The motorist’s companion. D. A fisherman.
22. We say that something was ‘darnaged beyond repair’ when it
A. can be repaired B. cannot be repaired
C. is very easy to repair D. is very difficult to repair
23. After helping the young motorist, Jacob .
A. asked the young man to pay him
B. asked the young man how much he owed him
- C. did not accept any payment for the job he had done
D. walked away without saying a word
24. What good lesson do we learn from the fisherman in this story?
A. To drive carefully on the highway.
B. To become good fishermen.
C. To check for motor cars before crossing roads.
D. To give hélp to those who need our help.

Choose the word opposite in meaning to the underlined word.
25. The district council has built a permanent shelter for the people at the bus

stop.
, A. public: B. temporary CC. private D. comfortable
- 26. Some farmers like to plant their crops before the rains.

A. during -’ B. around —(€. towards . D. after

27. The number of people going to church is increasing.
Cc

A. pleasing B. decreasing C. improving OD. surprising .



--- Page 183 ---
. Choose the correct verb to complete the sentence,
28. Last year, most of our farmers - Seasonal crops.

A. grow. B. growing C. grows D. grew
* 29. Whenever we go to the river, we __ him fishing there.
A. see B. saw C. sees D. seeing
30. We spent a lot of time .
A. write B. wrote ss: writing D. written

Choose the correct adjective to complete the sentence.
31. The black mamba is a very snake.

A. dangerous B. more dangerous
C. most dangerous D. dangerously
32. The computer is a gadget of the ___ World.
A. ancient ° B. modern C. passive D. excellent

Read this Passage and answer the questions that follow.

The Zebra

The zebra, a wild mammal found nowhere else in the world except in Africa,
is similar to a horse, but has black and white stripes. Zebras are speed demons
- they can gallop at speeds reaching sixty-five kilometres per hour. This is fast
enough to outpace their predators like lions, leopards and hyenas. Even their
foals can run with the herd within a few hours after their birth.

Zebras seem to know that there is safety in numbers as they always move and
graze in large herds. They do alll this for protection. When a group member
is wounded by a predator, other zebras will encircle it and attempt to scare
away the predator with their open teeth and hooves.

Zebras will only sleep when they are close toa neighbour so that they can be
warned if any predator approaches. Even when they sleep, they do so on the
hoof, just like the horses. Sleeping while standing enables the zebra to start
galloping away with the QFOUP as soon as q warning of danger is sounded.

The zebras stripes are unique, like our fingerprints, - each individual pattern
is not the same as any other. Their foals are able to recognize their mothers
because of these unique stripes.

33. Which of these statements is true?

A. Zebras are found alll over the world.
B. Zebras are found nowhere in Africa.
C. Zebras are found Only in Africa.
D. Zebras are found alll over the world, except in Africa.

34. Zebras are ‘speed demons’. This means that zebras
A. can run ver/fast B. cannot run fast

_ C:_are very brave animals. Ds MOV € and graze in large herds ws



--- Page 184 ---
35. What is a predator? -
A. Any wild animal like a zébra.
B. The young one of an animal.
C. An animal that is wounded by another animal.
D. An animal that hunts, kills and eats another animal.
36. The zebra stripes are unique. This means that the zebra stripes .

A. in all zebras are similar B. are not the same as in any two zebras
C. are easy to recognise D. are black and white in colour
37. Zebras ‘sleep on the hoof’. This means that zebras
A. are very brave animals B. sleep while standing
C. always gallop in groups D. are wild animals

38, The opposite of a predator is prey which means ____-
A. an animal that is hunted, killed and eaten by other animals
B. an animal that lives in the forest
C. a fierce animal
D. an animal that hunts, kills and eats other animals

Choose the correct answer.
39, When you have done something wrong, and you are sorry yOu

A. complain B. demand C. apologise D. lie
40. When you want someone to repeat what one has just said you say, ‘ "
A. | beg your pardon B. Please come in
C. Please do it 5. What did you say?
41. If you agree with someone who says, “Do you mind if we close the door?”
- you say, “ aa
A. | mind B. |don't mind C. Yes! mind  D. Please don't
42. One must take good care of ___ .
A. himself B. themselves ©. yourself D. oneself
43. Neither John nor his brother Peter __ r.
- A. drink B. drinks Cc. drinking D. drunk
44, My mother as well as my father _ many languages.
A. speak B. speaking Cc. spoken D. speaks
45. The bus has a certain number of it is allowed to carry ata time.
A. pedestrians . B. audience
C. passengers D. spectators
46. The sunsets ‘at .,
A. dawn B. mid-night Cc. dusk D. daybreak
47. Football has more television than wrestling. .
A. spectators B. viewers C. players D. listeners
48. During the parade, the soldiers sang the National Anthem, 2
A. isn’t it B. didn’tthey ©. aren't they D. won't they
Choose one word in which the ea has a different sound from. the rest.
49, A. heat B. defeat Cc. sweat D. please
eZ



--- Page 185 ---
Choose the correct verb to complete the senlence 7
28. Last year, most of our farmers - Seasonal crops.

A. grow... B. growing C. grows D. grew
29. Whenever we go to the river. we __ him fishing there.
A. see B. saw C. sees D. seeing
30. We spent a lot of time .

A. write B. wrote Cy. writing D. written

Choose the correct adjective to complete the sentence.

31. The black mamba is q very snake.
A. dangerous B. more dangerous
C. most dangerous D. dangerously
32. The computer is a gadget of the —_ World.
A. ancient B. modern C. passive D. excellent

Read this Passage and answer the questions that follow.

The Zebra

The zebra, a wild mammal found nowhere else in the world except in Africa,
is similar toa horse, but has black and white stripes. Zebras are speed demons
- they can gallop at speeds reaching sixty-five kilometres per hour. This is fast
enough to outpace their predators like lions, leopards and hyenas. Even their
foals can run with the herd within a few hours after their birth.

Zebras seem to know that there is safety in numbers as they always move and
graze in large herds. They do all this for protection. When a group member
is wounded by a predator, other zebras will encircle it and attempt to scare

away the. predator with their open teeth and hooves.

Zebras will only sleep when they are close toa neighbour so that they can be
warned if any predator approaches. Even when they sleep, they do so on the
hoof, just like the horses. Sleeping while standing enables the zebra to start
* galloping away with the QFOUP as soon as a warning of danger is sounded.

The zebras stripes are unique, like our fingerprints, - each individual pattern
is not the same as any other. Their foals are able to recognize their mothers
because of these Unique stripes.

33. Which of these statements is true?
A. Zebras are found all over the world.
B. Zebras are found nowhere in Africa.
C. Zebras are found only in Africa.
D. Zebras are found all over the world, except in Africa.
34. Zebras are ‘speed demons’. This means that zebras
A. can run very fast B. cannot run fast
CL are very brave animals iD, move and graze in large herds eee



--- Page 186 ---
35, What is a predator?
A. Any wild animal like a zébra.
B. The young one of an animal.

C. An animal that is wounded by another animal.
D. An animal that hunts, kills and eats another animal.
36. The zebra stripes are unique. This means that the zebra stripes .

A. in all zebras are similar B.
C. are easy to recognise

are not the same as in any two zebras

D. are black and white in colour

37. Zebras ‘sleep on the hoof’. This means that zebras

A. are very brave animals B.
C. always gallop in groups

D.

sleep while standing
are wild animals

38. The opposite of a predator is prey which means ____.
A. ananimal that is hunted, killed and eaten by other animals

B. an animal that lives in the forest

C. a fierce animal

D. an animal that hunts, kills and eats other animals

Choose the correct answer.

39. When you have done something wrong, and you are sorry you

A. complain B. demand ©. apologise OD. lie
40. When you want someone to repeat what one has just said you say, * "
A. | beg your pardon 8. Please come in
C. Please do it 5D. What did you say?
41. \f you agree with someone who says, “Do you mind if we close the door?"
> you say, " .
A. | mind B. |don'tmind ¢. Yes|mind  D. Please don't
42. One must take good care of __ .
A. himself B. themselves C. yourself D. oneself
43. Neither John nor his brother Peter beer.
* A. drink B. drinks Cc. drinking D. drunk
44, My mother as well as my father _ many languages.
A. speak B. speaking C. spoken D. speaks
45. The bus has a certain number of it is allowed to carry ata time.
A. pedestrians B. audience
C. passengers ID. spectators
46. The sun setgat * |
A. dawn B. mid-nigh (c. dusk D. daybreak
47. Football has more television ___ than wrestling.
A. spectators B. viewers (>. players D. listeners
48. During the parade, the soldiers sang the National Anthem, __: ?

A. isn't it

B. didn'tthey C.

aren't they D. won't they

Choose one word in which the ec has a different sound from the rest.

49. A. heat

B. defeat C.

sweat D. please

a !

ce

a
a



--- Page 187 ---
lll — = LNT

Which of these sentences is written correctly.

°50.A. The teacher asked the learners, is today Monday or Tuesday?
B. “The teacher asked the learners, Is today Monday or Tuesday?".
C. The teacher asked the learners, “Is today Monday or Tuesday?”
D. The teacher asked the learners, “is today monday or tuesday?”

(Total: 50 marks)

Ct et eee rte e ee wee eee e rere rere eee ee enna ner neste ne eesti neeeesensseces

English Paper 2
Time: 1 hour 45 minutes

SECTION A COMPOSITION (20 marks)

You are advised to spend I hour on this section.

Choose either question (a) or (6) and write about it.

A.
Imagine that one weekend you were walking with your little sister or brother
and gotinjured. Write a composition about the incident: Give your composition
a suitable heading then write it in 80-100 words. .
* when and where this happened
* where you were going and what for
* how your sister or brother got injured
* what you did to help her.

For quite some time now, you and your friend were being talked about by
many people, all for a very good reason. Write a letter to your uncle or aunt
telling him/her about it. The body of your letter should be in 80 - 100 words in
length. In your letter say:

* for how long you and your friend were being talked about

¢ what you had done, when and where

* how you did it, to whom

¢ why it is important.

SECTION B COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15 MARKS)
You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.

Read this passage and answer all the questions that follow.
(i) Comprehension (10 marks)

Anna the heroine

A fortnight ago, Anna’s name was in the newspapers. Anna had rescued a
sleeping baby from a burning hut. The mother had left her baby asleep in a
hut while she went,to fetch some water frorn the borehole. Then, a wild flame
from a veld fire was blown by a strong wind onto the grass roof of the hut,
setting it on fire.



--- Page 188 ---
Anna who was walking past rushed into the hut, wanting to save whatever she
could pull out of the burning hut. To her surprise, she saw a sleeping baby inside
the hut. Without wasting a moment, she grabbed the baby and ran out of the
hut with the crying child in her arms. The baby's mother came running from
the borehole. At first, the baby's mother wanted to beat Anna. When Anna
explained what had happened, the baby's mother became very grateful to
Anna. °

Then, on Saturday, Anna was window-shopping when she saw an elderly lady
with an expensive leather handbag. Suddenly a small car with three men
inside pulled up near the elderly lady. One man remained in the small car
while the others jumped out very quickly. They grabbed the elderly lady's
leather handbag, jumped back into their small car and sped off, leaving the
elderly lady frightened and confused.

Anna, who was watching alll this, quickly took down the registration number of
the small car and handed them to the police. The police were very thankful
to Anna. Soon, there was a high soeed chase on the highway. A police car
with sirens and flash lights on was chasing the small car with the three men
inside. When the police got near enough, they shot at one of the wheels of the
small car, making the wheel flat. That is when the small car stopped. The three
men inside it were handcuffed. The police recovered the expensive leather
handbag. . .

The next day, Anna's name was in the newspapers again. The newspaper
headline was: Anna, the heroine!

Questions

_ Why was Anna's name in the newspapers in the first place?

- What started the fire that set the hut on fire?

_ Where had the baby’s mother gone to when the hut caught fire?
How did Anna see the burning hut?

Did Anna know that there was a sleeping baby in the burning hut when she
rushed inside?

What was Anna doing when she saw an elderly lady? ,
How many men jumped out of the small car and what did they do?
. Why were the police thankful to Anna?

_ How did the police stop the small car they were chasing?

0.In the end what happened to the expensive handbag?

aR WN >

= 30 ONO

(ii) Summary _ (5 marks)
Under the heading Anna the heroine, write a summary of the story you have read
in the passage at the beginning of Section B. Write the summary in 30 - 40 words.



--- Page 189 ---
Listen carefully as the

cher tells you about the world heritage sites.

World heritage sites

eeu
tea

Heritage sites include the buildings, sites, traditions and art which a society
considers important parts of its history and culture or way of life.

World heritage sites are classified into two groups: the natural sites and the cultural
sites. Globally or throughout the world, there are currently one thousand and fifty-
two (1052) world heritage sites. Of these eight hundred and fourteen (814) are

cultural; two hundred and three (203) are natural, and thirty-five (35) are mixed
(cultural/natural).

In Africa alone, there are one hundred and nineteen (119) world heritage sites. In
our Country, Zimbabwe, there are three (3) natural and two (2) cultural; making
a total of five (5) world heritage sites.

Answer these questions from what you were listening to above. You are free to
quickly scan for information as you do this exercise.

1. What are heritage sites?

2. Which word do we use to mean the people's way of life?

3. Into which two groups are the world heritage sites classified?

4. How many world heritage sites are there throughout the world?

5. How many world heritage sites are there in Africa alone?

6. How many natural and cultural world heritage sites are there in Zimbabwe?

7

8

Would you say that the heritage sites are important or not important and why?
What is culture?

Read this passage and answer the questions which follow.

Zimbabwe's World Heritage Sites: Part 1

special history spectacular cultural viewing giant
downstream __ scarce canoeing formations centuries impassable
bald traditions permanent numerous abundant


--- Page 190 ---
pee

Amore

The Mana Pools on the Zamibezi River, downstream from the giant ma ode
Lake Kariba are one of Zimbabwe's natural world heritage sites. Mana means
‘four! in the local Shona language. This is referring to the four large. permanent

pools that make Up the Mana Pools.

Tne Mana Pools National Park is home to many hippos, crocodiles, elepnanss
rhinos, and buffaloes. Predators such as lions, wild dogs, jackals, leopares.
hyenas and cheetah are a common sight as they hunt, kill and eat their prey of
zebra, impala, waterbuck, wild pigs and other varieties of wildlife. There are also
numerous kinds of birds that include vultures, fish eagles, marabou storks, NAWKS.

swallows, and many others.

Py anneee eee cmewces qeeters sunerewerenees = met ——

Game viewing at the Mana Pools can be done from boats, on game drives,
and on bush walks. Fishing and canoeing on the pools are also very popular
activities for the countless tourists and nature lovers who flock to the Mana Pools
every year. The best time to visit the Mana Paols is between May and October.
This is the time when large groups of animals descend to the pools to drink as
water becomes scarce elsewhere. When the rainy season commences in late
November, the weather gets very hot and the roads become impassable.

The Matopo Hills are Zimbabwe's other natural world heritage site. Situated about
forty-five kilometres to the south of Bulawayo, the Matopo Hills are quite unusuc!
rock formations. The large boulders, often referred to as the ‘bald heads’ by the
local.people, andthe caves in between them provide abundant shelter for birds

and varieties of big and small wildlife.

There are rock paintings that date back to many centuries. These rock paintings
show the people’s lives and traditions of hunting and gathering the many wild
fruits that nature provided before deforestation.



--- Page 191 ---
,. :
a aoa! {

The mighty Victoria Falls, also known in the local language as Mosi-oa-tunya
upstream from Lake Kariba on the Zambezi River, are Zimbabwe's third natural
world heritage site. -

A 9 questions in full, correct sentences.
1. Which are Zimbabwe's three natural world heritage sites?
2. Where are the Mana Pools?

3. Why is it best to visit the Mana Pools between May and October?
4. Name one tradition that can be learnt from rock paintings.

5. Where are the Matopo Hills?

6. Which world heritage site is also known as Mosi-oa-tunya?

7. Where are the Victoria Falls?

8. What is deforestation?

Say this sentence ta the Class:
* Don's hair is as Black as coal.

Coal is black in colour. The simile as black as coal tells us that Don's hair is black
like coal.

.

Complete the sentences on the next page with the names in the box below:

a ok ee ema Ont ARy enema eee seme, nei tie oo ~

lightning pig donkey leaves log

lamb glass
shadow statue snow bees crystal
a id



--- Page 192 ---
,
; When a cobra strikes. it is as Quick aS ,
The young lady's teeth are as white as :
The teacher will not allow you to join the class when you ore as dirty as a ;
For about two minutes, the man stood as still as a .
i; want a friend who is as noiseless As a

Our football team's jerseys OTe as green as .
The naughty boy can be as stubborn as a ___—_——~
The water in the CUP is as Clear Os _

The carpenter polished the surface of the new table until i

__
when we are studying.

+ was Os smooth as

WONAAMRLNT

___
10. The children were as busy OS: .
11. The builder was very tired and he slept like a .
12: Our new teacher is gentle like a _.

emetrinr YY fe eros oe ot
PRPOLTRLE TA aa Net SSS

Example: We visited the Victoria Falls, a natural world wonder.

The phrase a natural world wonder describes the Victoria Falls.

nya .
Complete the following sentences with suitable describing phrases.

My uncle works in Harare, .
Everyday Jack walks to school with Anna, - .

2.

3, » Lake Kariba is on the Zambezi, _.
4. | will always remember Dennis, __-
5. The tourists climbed Mt Nyanga, —
6
7
8

_
.

That is Mr Gutu, ;
She grew UP in Bulawayo, .

He is suffering from malaria, .

Imagine that you went on an educational trip to one of Zimbabwe's natural \
heritage sites. Write a letter to a friend telling him/her about that educationc
The body of your letter should be 80 — 100 words in length. In the letter say:

* when you went for the educational trip, and to which natural world hel

sité

it
W | world heritage site is
h

ere that natura
Ww yOu travelled .
what you saw at the heritage site

whether or not yOu enjoyed the trip.

is black



--- Page 193 ---
The national anthem is also our heritage because it is very
and culture. Take turns to read aloud the national anthem

Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe

Oh lift, high, our flag of Zimbabwe
Born of the fire of the revolution:
And of the Precious blood of our heroes
Let’s defend it against all foes;

Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

important in our history

.

Behold Zimbabwe so richly adorned
With mountains and rivers beautitu!

Let rain abound and fields yield the seed
May all be fed and workers rewarded:
Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

Oh, God bless the land of Zimbabwe
The land of our heritage;

From the Zambezi to the Limpopo,
Our leaders be just and exemplary
Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe.

Sing the national anthem as a class.

Read the following padtsage and answer the questions that follow.
Zimbabwe's world heritage sites: Part 2 |
situated fascinating  'g

curving granite mortar
structures awe-inspiring incligenous foundations systematically
evidence _ terraces majestic unmatched artistry .
erected historians destination granite cultural
Massive huge created blocks

Civilisation



--- Page 194 ---
a

- a SE eae A +) wud ee

The Khami Monuments, situdted twenty-two kilometres to the west of Bulawayo,
as well as the Great Zimbabwe Monuments are Zimbabwe's two cultural world
heritage sites. Made of massive curving walls erected from millions of dry granite
stones shaped and fitted together, the Khami Monuments are one of Africa’s
largest stone structures. The majestic, awe-inspiring and fascinating stone walls of

_ the Knami Monuments are evidence of unmatched artistry.

Like the Great Zimbabwe Monuments, the dry stone walls of the Khami
Monuments are also erected without mortar.

The formations of the stone walls of the Khami Monuments and the artefacts
found there also provide evidence of a very strong and united early civilisation.
Some of the walls at the Khami Monuments have foundations built with huge
blocks which could only have been lifted by at least four men. The whole site of
the Khami Monuments reveals well-planned buildings erected on systematically

created terraces.
Historians agree that the Khami Monuments were once the capital of the

Kingdom of the Torwa people. Like the Great Zimbabwe Monuments, the Khami
Monuments are a popular destination for historians and tourists from all over the

world.

Answer these questions in full, correct sentences.
1. Which ar® Zimbabwe's two:cultural world heritage sites?

2. Where-are the. Khami Monuments?
3. What similarity is there between the walls of the Knami Monuments and

those of the Great Zimbabwe?



--- Page 195 ---
4. The Khami monuments are the capital of which Kingdom?

5S. What do we mean when we say that the Khami Ruins are a destination for
historians and tourists?

6. Which word can be Used in place of the Phrase ‘as well as’ at the beginning of
the passage?

7. The word ‘huge’ used in the second Paragraph of the Passage means .
A. very small B. very big .
C. very old D. quite new

8. The way the Khami Monuments were built shows that the people who built
them were very oo
A. stupid B. few and weak
C. kind D. creative and artistic

The words in the left column below are used and are written in bold in the passage
Zimbabwe's World Heritage Sites: Part 2.

Match the words in the left column with the correct meanings in the right column.
You can use a dictionary.

artefacts... the substance used for joining bricks or stones when building

CUIVING....ceeeceesesees the most basic Part of something from the rest of itis developed

Civilization............. the place where someone or something is going to

OMTISTY esse eeeeceeee. Q gradual, smooth bending, for example, in walls, roads and
rivers

destination ........... extremely interesting

erected wee. a word that describes something that is liked by many people

foundation ........... facts or signs that help to prove something

MASSIVE... eeeeeeees thin flat sections of the land made to look like steps |

evidence.............. a society that has developed its own way Of life and places

POPUIOM. cece. built or constructed ,

fascinating ........... interesting objects from the past

MOPTOP oc eeeeesseecee. great skill

very, very big

Listen carefully and say this sentence correctly after your teacher:

After the church service, the girls went to work in the kitchen.

In the words church, service, girls anid work the ur, erand irhaveaq deep e sound
and ther is silent. Say these words correctly. Note that they allhave a deep e sound.



--- Page 196 ---
urgent curve — Thursday

burn hurt purple surname
curtains urban — surface
dirty shirt circle birthday
third first thirty _Sir
fertile herd term mercy
perfect merchant sermon

bird thirteen — skirt — firm

perfume person reserve

: fs 3 ; z =
we 4g eB ep be i 7) y og phen ee FS te eo we er wut 4s
who, whet when, why, where src Ge”

Listen carefully as one of you reads this paragraph:

My first pencil

When | was still very young, My mother bought a pencil for me. | did not know
what it was. | also did not know why she bought it for me. | just thought it was a toy
which she had bought for me from the shops. That is where she always bought
some toys for me. Then my brother, who was already going to school, told me
what it was. He also showed me how to use it.

|
| Using who, what, where, when, which, why and how, complete the following
sentences:

1. Most tourists like to visit the Mana Pools do so because that is
there is a lot of wildlife. . |
2. |donot know they did not plant the trees the soil was still wet.
3. The teacher asked me |was doing _ all the others were studying.
4, Theman was driving the car __. overturned is my uncle.
5. There was nobody knew to answer the question correctly.
| 6. Do you know team won the match and by ____ many goals?
7. |wonder. there are so many people still cannot read or write.
| 8. From _____| was standing. | could easily see of the two competitors

had won the tight race.

ed f eat) om

| Copy the letters and sentences.

| Ww Ww. When will Willie Winkie walk with Winnie Williams?

Xx Xx Xmas is when we expect Xavier to do that exercise.

Yy Yy You, your friend and I were all born on New Year’s Day.

Zz Zz The Zambezi River forms the border between Zimbabwe and Zambia.



--- Page 197 ---
Zimbabwe's world heritage sites

In 80 - 120 words, write a composition under the heading Zimbabwe's world
heritage sites. In your composition, write:

* the names of the sites and where they are

* whether they are natural or cultural sites

* a short description of each site

You may read books, magazines cand newspapers or browse the internet for more
information.

EW Tol 2 Oe ke

In the last two units (Unit 31 and 32) you learnt about Zimbabwe's World
Heritage Sites. Choose any of Zimbabwe's world heritage sites and in just 2-3
minutes, tell the class about it.

First read this paragraph silently. Then read the paragraph clearly to the
facilitator.

‘Our heritage

Heritage includes buildings, structures, areas and the arts that are important in
the history and culture of people. The heroes acres, hot springs, rock paintings
found in many places, wetlands, sacred forests and mountains where our
ancestors lived are heritage sites. The traditional songs and dances, as well as
the musical instruments are our heritage. There are so many heritage sites and
things in our own areas. Some of our heritage things and tools can be seen in
the museums. There are some people who think it is primitive to keep these old
things when, in fa@t, it is honourable to preserve our heritage. It is therefore,
very important for all of us to preserve our heritage sites and things.

“0

Answer these questions.
1. What are heritage sites?



--- Page 198 ---
2XnRW NV)

ive the names of any three examples o
own area.

Where’ can one see some of our heritage things and tools today? .

What does the passage say is honourable?

What is this paragraph encouraging people to do?

According to this passage, is it right for people to build houses in the
wetlands?

The word ‘preserve’ at the end of the passage means

A. to forget about something because if is very old

B. to take care of something so that it is not damaged

C. to build something completely new

D. tomake sure that something happens

The people who lived a long, long time ago and are related to us are our

f heritage sites or things found in your

A. friends B. enemies C: ancestors D. heroes

ei
re

aiitionel music

Listen to one traditional song from your area. Sing that traditional song
to the class.

Look for a traditional musical instrument. Tell the class about the instrument.
Afterwards play the musical instrument to the class.



--- Page 199 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher reads this short story to you.
Jaya and Gopo

Jaya and Gopo were friends. Both were prayerful men who went to church every

7 week. One day the two friends were ona pilgrimage. This is a journey that people
make to a holy place, usually to pray. Their pilgrimage was taking them across a
thick and vast forest with wild animals.

Suddenly, a roaring lion came charging towards the two men. Jaya, who was in
front, knelt down and started praying aloud. He said, “Oh, most powerful God,
please save me from that fierce lion.”

Gopo who was behind his friend quickly started climbing a tall tree while at the
same time praying. He said, “Oh, most powerful God, please give me strength
and speed to climb this tall tree so that | don't get killed by that fierce lion.”

Take turns to continue with the story of Jaya and Gopo. You may speak for only 2
minutes, _

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

tortoise wisdom gourd creatures consult
pumpkin Proved ‘ annoyed search

Tortoise and the wisdom gourd

One day Tortoise decided to collect all the wisdom in the world. He would be the
wisest and most famous creature on earth. Even kings and rulers would come to
consult him.



--- Page 200 ---
SAE

Tortoise travelled to many lands in search of the wisdom. He also read man,
informative books and talked to many wise people. He listened to the racic
watched television and browsed the internet.

When Tortoise had collected what he thought was all the wisdom in the worid,
he put it all in a gourd. He closed the opening of the gourd with a tight lid so that
the wisdom would not escape.

The next task was to find a safe place to keep the gourd. Tortoise wanted a place
that-no one could reach. First, he thought of the dark cave in the mountain. Then
he thought of the deep pool at the river. He also thought of burying the gourd
in a deep hole near an anthill. At last he found a very tall tree that he believed
nobody could climb.

He tied a strong rope round the gourd. Then, with one hand holding that rope,

- Tortoise tried to climb the tall tree with the other hand. This proved very difficult.

Every time Tortoise tried one step up the tree, he would slip to the ground at the
bottom of the tree.

Hare who wa passing by saw Tortoise trying, but failing to go up the tall tree.
Hare said to Tortoise, “Tie the rope with the gourd round your waist. Then you can
use both hands to climb the tall tree.”



--- Page 201 ---
Tortoise was very annoyed that he had missed this simple piece of wisdom. In
fact, he realized that Hare was wiser than himself. He was so annoyed that he
dropped the gourd. The gourd fell on the hard ground and shattered. All the
wisdom that Tortoise had put inside the gourd scattered all over the world again.
Today, we too can find some of that wisdom if we search for it.

Choose the correct answers.
1. Tortoise wanted to collect all the wisdom in the world in order to
A. become a king or a ruler
B. travel all over the world
C. be the wisest creature on earth
D. be wiser than Hare
2. What was the safest place Tortoise was going to keep the gourd?
A. A dark mountain cave.
B. A deep pool at the river.
C. A deep hole near anthill.
D. Avery tall tree in the valley.
3. According to this story, what made Tortoise fail to climb the tree?
A. Trying to climb the tall tree using one hand.
B. The gourd was full and too heavy for him.
C. The tree was just too tall for him to climb.
D. Tortoises do not climb trees.
4. Tortoise was annoyed when he realized that
A. he had collected all the wisdom in the world
B. he had not collected all the wisdom in the world
C. Hare was watching him all the time
D, he could not climb the tall tree
9. The gourd with the wisdom fell on the hard ground and
A. scattered throughout the world.
B. Hare took it away
C. broke into many small pieces
D. annoyed Tortoise
6. According to this story, the tortoise
A. had collected all the wisdom in the world
B. had not collected all the wisdom in the world
C. and the hareWere working together to collect wisdom
D. was afraid that the hare was going to steal his wisdom
7. This story tells us that it is easier to climb trees with :
A. astring B. a gourd C. onehand ~ D. both hands
8. Choose the statement that is true from these:
A. There isno more wisdom in the world today.
B. Today, we too can become wise if we look for wisdom.
C. Tortoise fell down from the tree with the gourd in his hands.
D. Hare managed to take away the gourd full of all the wisdom from Tortoise.



--- Page 202 ---
‘“iocabulary
These words are used in the story Tortoise and the wisdom gourd.

Le mre tere renter

annoyed . shattered decided escape
consult climb > scattered __—realized

First, see how these words are used in the story. They are written in bold.

Rewrite the following sentences replacing the underlined phrases with these words:
He keeps the new goat in a fenced plot so that it does not run away.

When the children play, they love to go up the trees.

When | woke up, | became aware that | had been dreaming.

The teacher was made anary by the noise the learners were making in class.
The clay pot br: into ny small pieces when it fell on the hard ground.
This year, | have made up my mind to work very hard at school.

When | have a problem | always ask for advice from my brother.

The diaspora are the people who have moved and spread all over the world.

CONaAARWN>

By reading story books, browsing the internet, listening to stories told by other people
or on the radio and television, prepare an animal story to tell the class. Then, in 2 -
3 minutes, tell the class the animal story that you have prepared. At the end, say
who of the learners was the best story teller. Are you able to repeat any one of the
stories told by the other learners?

“fe diferent sounds of ov

Say the following sentence correctly after the teacher:
Are you the young man who bought a luxurious car for twenty thousand dollars?
The ou in young, you, thousand, bought, luxurious have different sounds.

Say the following words correctly.

ou as in young » cousin trouble courage touch
country nourish couple double

ou asin you ‘| group youth route SOUP coupon
wounded soup troupe bouquet



--- Page 203 ---
boundary drought
bounce doubt

shoulder
nought

dangerous delicious serious Courageous
prosperous victorious

of te pal tense o JeSQgurar yeros

Look at this sentence:
* The man knelt down and began to pray.
knelt and began are the past tenses of the verbs kneel and begin.

Rewrite the following sentences in the simple past tense of the verbs in the brackets.
You may use the dictionary.

1. My parents (build) that house five years ago.

Last night | (sleep) very well.

Yesterday | (see) a big snake in the garden.

After the long journey on foot, | (feel) very tired.

Before | came to school this morning, | (sweep) the yard.

Last week | (lose) some money on the way to the shops.

My grandfather who is now late (keep) a long beard.

Last term the teacher (teach) us how to send e-mails.

AkWN

09 NO

ca RR erat Fries mage fe YWOOMS &

Say these two sentences to the class:

* Active voice: Charles ate all the oranges.

* Passive voice: All the oranges were eaten by Charles, .
Note that the verb eaten in the Passive voice is always in the Past participle tense.

Change the sentences below to the passive voice.
A lady drives our school bus.

Themba broke the window pane.

A thief stole our blankets.

Many people saw the eclipse of the moon.

A stranger took away my hat.

My dog nearly bit our visitor.

The boys did the work.

N&AORWHD —



--- Page 204 ---
8. Janet drank all the milk.
9. The school choir sang the National Anthem.
10. All the new farmers grew potatoes.

3 olcture composition ;

The following two pictures tell a story.

Give the story a heading then write the story in 80 — 100 words. In the story, write:
° what was happening, where, when,

* what happened before that

¢ who did it happen to

« howit happened

° howit ended.

You may use the following words and phrases in your composition:

* marathon race, e competitors from ....

° running as fast-as ... *« breathing heavily as they..

° - spectators cheering wildly ¢ lots of practice before the ...
¢ § starting lineup e leading in the race

* crossed the finishing line ° well ahead of the rest

* wona trophy/and a prize of...



--- Page 205 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about good manners.

Good manners

Good manners, also known as etiquette, are a sign of. respect: we show. to others.
A person with good manners is courteous, or polite: towards others: Examples of
good manners-include: ae :

* usirig the word ‘please’ whén you ask someone '¥oeSomething

* saying ‘thank you’ to the person who has listened’ to-you or helped you

* saying, ‘You're welcome,’ to’ someone who has said, ‘Thank you, ' to you

* greeting people

* covering the mouth and the nose when you cough, yawn or sheeze

* opening and holding doors for others, especially adults or elders

* letting others, especially adults or elders go in:or out.first

* giving up your seat to adults or elders.

Talk about other ways in which you can show good manners.

A game to play in pairs
Every learner gets a chance to make a specific request to another learner of his/
her choice as follows:

Learner 1: Jonas, could you please lend me your pencil?
Jonas: With pleasure. Here it is.

Learner 1: Thank you very much, Jonas.

Jonas: You're welcome/Don't mention/It was a pleasure.

You may start the request with any one of the following beginnings:
Could you please

Will you please

May | please

Can you please

see

as



--- Page 206 ---
Make different requests, for example, for help to work out a problem, the time,

the date, someone else's name, story book fo read at home, drink or fruit that
someone has etc.

Read this story and answer the questions that follow.

Joseph, the well-mannered boy

manners character | queve squeeze excitement
. attire volley murmured whistle pardon
behaving situations doubts etiquette off-duty

: especially respectively

Wednesday is sports day at Joseph's school. Just 6
walked up to Mrs Jiti, the sports director, and said,
excused from sports today?” .

efore sports started, Joseph
“Madam! May |.please be

Mrs Jiri; who had ‘a whistle on her lips. murmured something that Joseph did not
quite hear. Politely Joseph said, “| beg your pardon, Madam.” Joseph knows

that it is good manners to say, ‘I beg your pardon,’ when he wants someone to
repeat what they had just said before.

Mrs Jiri removed the whistle from her lips and said, “Is there a problem, Joseph?"

Joseph replied “Yes Madam! | have a running stomach and | need to pass
through the clinic on my way home.”

“Oh! | see!” said the sports director. “I'm very sorry for you, Joseph. You are
excused from sports. Get well soon!”

“Thank you, Madam,” said Joseph as he turned to go away from Mrs Jiri.

Every teacher at the school knew Joseph as an honest and hardworking learner

with very good manners. The sports director did not have any doubts that Joseph
was indeed not feeling well.

Outside the school gate, Joseph stood at th
waiting for the Qus. It would be bad manners to jump the queve. It would also

be bad mariners to push or squeeze through the people in a queve. Joseph
greeted the people next to him in the queve.

e back of the queue of people



--- Page 207 ---
cates

Answe

arwn >

CO No

Inside the bus, Joseph gave up his seat to an adult who had. no seat. Joseph
had done the:same on several occasions in the past. He had given up his seat
to adults on the train, on the bus, in church, at home, in the hall as well as at
weddings, parties or shows.

CLINIC

When Joseph arrived at the clinic, it was still open to the patients although the
door was closed on account of the windy and dusty weather. There were two
other people who also wanted to enter the clinic at the same time with him.
Joseph opened the door into the clinic. He stepped back to let the two people
get inside first.

r the following questions in full, correct sentences.

When is sports day at Joseph's school?

Who was the sports director at Joseph's school?

What did Josephwant Mrs Jiri to do when he said, “I beg your pardon, Madam."
Why did Joseph want to be excused from sports?

Is Q ‘queue’ a group of people sitting together or a group of people standing
in a line? .

How did Joseph go to the clinic?

What did Joseph do on the bus which showed good manners?

Choose the right ending to this sentence from the three in the brackets:
Joseph was (a bad-mannerd boy/an ill-tempered boy/a well-mannered
boy).



--- Page 208 ---
Sool a suNnieary

Write a summary of the story Joseph, the well-mannered boy in 30 - 40 words.
Here are some clues to help you:

* what Joseph asked for from the sports director on the sports day

* what Joseph did when he got to the bus stop

* what Joseph did at the clinic.

. fig GHhough - |

Example: The clinic was still open although the door was closed.

Other ways of saying the same:

(i) Although the clinic was still open, the door was closed.

(ii) The door was closed although the clinic was still open.

Note: We use although for introducing a statement that makes the main statement
surprising or less true.

Take turns to say your own sentences using although.

gynd

rapt lt cae se
we Ne ad tad

We use unless for saying what will happen if something else does not happen, for

example:

¢ The rivers will dry Up unless it rains soon.

* You will be late unless you hurry up.

° Iwill not give you my sweets unless you let me play with your ball.
Say your own sentences with unless.

Complete the sentences below by choosing a suitable ending.

7. The dirty plates will pile up __.

unless



--- Page 209 ---
First look at the first two paragraphs of the story Joseph, the well-mannered boy.

Your teacher will read out the two paragraphs while you write them neatly and
quickly with all the correct punctuation marks.

Your friend showed very good manners to your Parents at a social event. Write a
letter to your friend thanking him/her for the good manners he/she showed to your
parents. The body of your letter should be 80 — 100 words in length. In the letter
describe the event:

* where you met, when

the good manners your friend showed

what your parents said afterwards

thank your friend for the good manners he/she showed

what you promise to do when you also meet the friend's parents.

Pi Y, fo tan ste
] ~ dt 4

Rewrite each sentence with the correct word from the brackets.
1. The sick man was so (week/weak) that he could not walk on his own.
2. The learners in our class are all (two/too) young to get married,
3. The people go to Church to (pray/prey) .
4. Please speak (aloud/allowed) if you want everyone to hear you. |
5. When | went up the mountain, | (saw/sew) some baboons there.
6. | thanked my friend for giving'‘me a (piece/peace) of cake to eat.
7. An athlete is someone who is ‘good at (sports/spots).. -

: 8. My father has bought.a (knew/new) pair of shoes for me.

9. The'road to the @ity Goes (through/threw) the'ferms.. —

 10.We shall go out fishing when the (weather/whether) is fine.

!

: In pairs, read this dialogue with clarity, expression and proper intonation:

Learner A: Could you please tell me what the date is today? _

++ nates se eae re raat tt a nnn er tap a tte, we ae



--- Page 210 ---
0 OEESSST Tot SS

t)

| Learner B: Twenty-third of November.
{Learner A: Oh! Thank you very much. Time flies!
' Learner B: You're welcome.
‘LearnerA: . Do you realize that we're almost through with Grade Five?
| Learner B: | hadn't given that a thought. But, yes! Soon we'll be Grade Six
learners. .
| Learner A: Oh, that's great! | really look forward to that.
i. Learner B: And | too! But first, we must pass the Grade Five examination.
: Learner A: We'll pass. We've worked hard throughout the year.
: Learner B: | believe you. We should all pass because we've all worked
| - ard. i
‘ Learner A: | must also thank you for all the help you've given me throughout
. the year.
, Learner B: It was a pleasure!

| Listen carefully as the teacher tells you or reads an animal story to you. In 2-3
minutes, retell the story.



--- Page 211 ---
Listen carefully as your teacher tells you about the play you are going to stage.
You are going to stage a play as a class. Here are a few facts about the play you
are going to stage:

Title of the play I will marry when lam ready

The actors:

1. Mr Zimarri...... a rich man

2. SIPIWE wo...eeeeeeeeee a Grade 5 school girl and daughter of Mr and Mrs Mbizi
3. Mr MbiZi ......... Sipiwe’s father

4. Mrs MbiZi............ Mr Mbizi's wife and Sipiwe’s mother

3. Mrs Sizibd.......... Sipiwe’s class teacher

6. Learners 1-6....... the other learners in the same class with Sipiwe

First, the actors read the play. Then the actors learn their parts by heart in order to
stage the play.
Scene 1

(Mr Mbizi, in the company of Sipiwe, his daughter, approach Mr Zimari, the rich
man who Is seated on a garden chair and enjoying a cup of tea. There are food
plates showing that Mr Zimari takes lots of food during his meals. As Mr Mbizi and
his daughter Sipiwe get nearer Mr Zimari, Sipiwe stands a distance away but not
too far behind while her father, Mr Mbizi gets close to Mr Zimari. )

~ rte commen «grag ange ny stem ene la ee Ce eS



--- Page 212 ---
Mr Zimari:: Hello there Mbizi! What brings you to my homestead at this odd hour of
the day? Didn't | tell you that | have no jobs for you?

Mr Mbizi: Sorry to disturb your peace, Mr Zimari. Will you please lend me twenty
dollars only. | need it very urgently.

‘Zimari: = Twenty dollars! What for? Besides are you aware that if | lend you that
money, you'll give me twice the arnount when you repay it?

_Mr Mbizi: I'm aware; but I've no choice. My daughter standing there (pointing
to Sipiwe) needs the money to go on a school trip to a famous heritage
site.

Zimari: (Looking at.Sipiwe with an interested face) Your daughter? Standing

oo there! Is that your daughter? Oh, sc you do have a daughter, after all!
“Mr Mbizk: Yes, Mr Zimari! That's my daughter cind the money | wish to borrow from
you is all for her.

Mr Zimari: Ah! Let me see: eh,... in that case I'll lend you the money you need. !'l

also give your daughter, ....give, not lend, five dollars pocket money
for the school trip. (Taking some money from his pocket and separating
it) Here is the twenty dollars (handing the twenty dollars to Mr Mbizi).
And here is your pocket money (handing the five dollars to Sipiwe).
Mr Mbizi: Oh, thank you very much for your kindness, Mr Zimari. | promise to repay
twice the amount as you said in two weeks’ time.
Mr Zimari: We'll talk! We'll talk like men. Let the girl go then we can talk.
(Sipiwe leaves her father, talking to Mr Zimari.) :

bf

Pe es

nswer the following questions in full, correct sentences.

Who wanted to borrow some money?

How much money did he want to borrow?

For whom was he borrowing the money?

What did Sipiwe need the money for?

Do you think that Mr Zimari was a good or a bad money-lender and why?
Would you say that Mr Zimari was a rich or a poor man and why?

The word: ‘urgently’ used by Mr Mbizi at the beginning of the play means

NAMRWN- D>}

A. immediately . B. already
C. sometime later D. always
8. How much money did Mr Mbizi promise to pay back in two weeks’ time?
A. twenty dollars B. twenty-five dollars
C. forty dollars D. fifty dollars
9. In borrowjng: and lending, the person who is giving out something is

A. borrowing B. receiving
Cc. lending D. selling



--- Page 213 ---
Scene 2

(As soon as Sipiwe leaves, Mr Zimari offers a seat, some tea and food to Mr Mbizi
who is rather surprised by the generosity now being extended to him. )

Mr Zimari:
Mr Mbizi:
Mr Zimari:

Mr Mbizi:

Mr Zimari:

Mr Mbizi:

Mr Zimari:

Mr Mbizi:

Mr Zimari:

Mr Mbizi:

Mr Zimari:

Scene 3

Guess what | thought when you said the money was all for your
daughter?

| thought that you felt very sorry for a poor man like me.

Exactly! | was also thinking of the best way to help you and your family
so that you are never poor again. Eh, ...if you give me your daughter to
marry, then you'll never, ever be poor again.
Hmm...that's a big issue, Mr Zimari! Besides you are already a married
man and my daughter is at school,... eh and still foo young to marry.
Also, eh, ...her mother would never allow that to happen.

Look here, Mbizi. Talk like a man. A rich man like me can marry. as many
wives as he chooses. What's important to you is the bride price that |'ll
pay for your daughter and, eh....as you know very well, | have lots of
money and cattle.

(After a short moment of silence, while thinking quietly)

In that case, Mr Zimari, let me go and discuss the matter first with my

wife and daughter. Then I'll come back to you.

(looking and sounding very surprised) Discuss? Discuss what? This-is not
an issue for women. If | were you, I'd just go and tell them what I've
decided to do and they must agree. Full stop.

(Sounding low and looking rather small and apologetic) Give me time,
Mr Zimari! | promise you that I'll do my best for you.

(Sounding happy now) Then you'll be a rich man overnight. And your
daughter will come here to live a new life of plenty and happiness.
She'll even have servants to cook and work for her.

Oh, ...that’s great! Isn't my daughter lucky to be chosen by a man like
you, Mr Zimari?
(Shaking hands with Mr Mbizi) It's a deal. Good-bye, Mr Mbizi. When you
come back |'ll be talking to you as my father-in-law. (Mr Mbizi leaves. Mr
Zimari remains seated with a th umbs-up sign of victory and satisfaction).

TOC ORO eee eee tema e neta ener een eeeeeeeee ee reee rere nen eeeneresenereeetoes

_ +

(Seated on a wooden stool, Mr Mbizi talks to his wife and daughter who are both
seated ona floor mat.)

Mr Mbizi:

Mrs Mbizi:
Mr Mbizi:

I've called you both to give you very important news; ...news that
should please every mother and daughter.

You were with Mr Zimari, the rich man. Did he offer you a job this time?
He is offering our family something more than a job. He is promising to



--- Page 214 ---
| Mrs. Mbizi:

Mr Zimari:

Mrs Mbizi:

-Mr Mbizi:

Scene 4

give us a lot of money if we giv

EE RR ES See

e him our daughter, Sipiwe to marry. Isn't
that wonderful?

(after a long, thoughtful silence) What did you say then to Mr Zimari?

|, ...eh ... |, ...at first | refused; then he made me change my mind when
he told me all the good things that he'll do for us as Sipiwe’s parents,
and for our daughter, Sipiwe. She’s going to live like a queen, | tell you.
(Turning and talking to her daughier, Sipiwe) You've heard what your
father has said. What do you have to say for yourself, my daughter?
No! No! No! Mother of Sipiwe! You can't ask her that. She’s too young
to know the importance of a marriage to someone like Mr Zimari. I've
already made the decision for her. She'll leave school and marry Mr
Zimari. .

cece e ccc e es ees e eee ee cere en eaeseerereceeeessssrercsscseovonscrccrsasccrsessee see ee

(In a Grade Five class, a lesson is in session. The teacher, Mrs Siziba who is the class
teacher is in front of her class.)

Mrs Siziba: (After the usual morning greetings) Today we'll begin our lesson with

each one of you telling the class what you'd like to be when you grow

Up.

(The first six learners all sound very cheerful as they take turns to speak.)

Learner 1:
Learner 2:
Learner 3:
Learner 4:
Learner 5:
Learner 6:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba

When'l grow up, I'd like to be a doctor.

When | grow up, I'd like to be a mechanic.
When.| grow up, I'd like to be an engineer.
When | grow up, I'd like to be a soccer Star.
When.| grow up I'd like to be a musician.
When | grow up, I'd like to be a news reporter.

(Sounding very low) When | grow up,...eh, .... my father wants me to
be a housewife. But | wanted to become an author and write school
books.

(With tears on her cheeks, Sipiwe starts sobbing uncontrollably)
(Looking very surprised and worried as she moves towards the sobbing
Sipiwe to comfort her)

What's the matter, Sipiwe!? Are you alright?

(Mrs Siziba hugs Sipiwe and leads her away from the rest of the class)
Come with me outside and tell me the problem.

(The Fest of the learners remain behind, all looking perplexed by the turn
of events)

veccccccccccececccccucesscuccsesscssssavcceseusesssavecesesscsccererccsesee seers rere eee ee eee



--- Page 215 ---
Scene 5

eliiaieleeie ete eeeee ereeonnene er amenetinnoaimel roeieaenbenctemeeeenetententertareneneee aenimraiamanratomemebeneriacnneeraeaeaeenaecemenereeeenentieenene tee ee ene ee a ee

(Away from other people, the class teacher, Mrs Siziba has: a. one-on- -one talk with '
Sipiwe while standing outside.) .

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Mrs Siziba:

Sipiwe:

Scene 6

(While holding Sipiwe.on her shoulder in a friendly manner)

Listen, Sipiwe: I'd like to help you. Tell. me your problem.
My father, ...eh, ....my father says | should leave school and marry Mr:
Zimari, the rich man. ,
(Surprised and sounding very worried.too). Did he say that?
Yes, Madam! They have even agreed on the bride price Mr Zimari is:
going to pay my father.
Really?

Yes, Madam. And my rnother cannot stop that. My father says the -
children belong to the father; not to the mother.

(After a moment of deep, thoughtful silence)

Hmmm ...Sipiwe! | want you to listen carefully to me. You must do the
following two things:

One: .... refuse to leave school.

TWO: ...... refuse to marry Mr Zimari.

This is the one time when you as a child can disobey your parents.

If your father forces you to leave school or to marry Mr Zimari, report

- him to the police immediately.

And if he threatens to beat me up or throw me out of the house?
Report him to the police immediately. The police and the law are there
to protect you whenever you are wronged, even by your own parents,
relatives or friends. You have nothing to fear: the law will protect you,
my child! Be very strong but polite when you speak to your father.
(Now sounding enlightened and re-assured) Thank you very much,
Madam.

You're most welcome, my child. And remember I'll always be there to
help you.

Thank you, Madam.

COSHH Sameer ee eee eereses sees eZeEHeEeE Ee EEE HEE HEE CEE RE EE EEE ERE EEE EEE HEHEHE HELE OES EERE

(Seated on a wooden stool, Mr Mbizi talks to his wife and daughter who are both
seated on a floor naat.J

Mr Mbizi:

Sipiwe:

SO, Sipiwe; after the school trip we'll take you to your rich husband, Mr
Zimari. He's said that he'll have all the bride price ready. He has also
prepared a big welcome party for you at his home.

Father, I'm sorry to tell you that I'm not going to leave school yet. I'm
also not going to marry Mr Zimari or any other man yet. I'm still too
young to leave school or to manry. ll choose to marry or not to marry

oR ne renter ae oe enn ee nee ce



--- Page 216 ---
‘when | grow up. Even if | choose to marry, | will decide when to marry

. and who to marry.

Mrs Mbizi: (Sounding humble and motherly as she addresses her daughter) Sipiwe

| my child; speak with respect. Remember that you're talking to your
father. He's the head of the family and we are just but his organs.

Sipiwe: Mother.| respect you and | respect my father. But in respecting you, !
also hope that you'll be respecting me and my rights.

Mr Mbizi: So, ...eh, ... so what do | tell Mr Zimairi?

Sipiwe: . Father, just go and fell Mr Zimari exactly what | said to you. I'm quite
. + sure that Mr Zimari will understand because his own daughters are in
school right now as we speak.

Mrs Mbizi: (ina humble but convincing voice) My husband, your daughter is right

- and we were wrong. Remember there is a law that protects these
children from the early marriages like this one. It's never too late for us
to do the right thing. Let us dllow Sipiwe to continue with her education.
Then later in life, she can make her own decisions about marriage.

Mr Mbizi:. (Looking defeated but helpless, he says nothing but just holds his chin in
his hand) .

ce cccecccccucevccccccecesssssecnsesensvesssecesssccsssresasscscccccseseasacceseesese reese eee ee

Scene 7

(Mr Zimari, the rich man is seated on a garden chair and enjoying a cup of fea.

There are several covered food plates showing that Mr Zimari takes lots of food

during his meals. Mr Mbizi looks rather subdued and afraid as he gets close to where

Mr Zimari is sitting.)

Mr Zimari: (as he extends a greeting hand to the arriving Mr Mbizi and offering him
a seat) Welcome, my father-in-law! You've brought me good news,
haven't you?

Mr Mbizi: (speaking as he throws his arms in the air in desperation) I'm afraid that

no news is good news, Mr Zimari. My daughter has turned down your
generous offer.
She says that she is not leaving school yet, and that she is still too young
to marry. She also says that when she grows up she will decide whether
to marry, when to marry and who to marry. If | try to force her, you and
| will get into trouble with the police.

Mr Zimari: (sounding very disappointed but helpless) Damn it! Then pay back the

money you borrowed plus the pocket money | gave her.

Mr Mbizi: Certainly, Mr Zimari. I'll go now and sell my chickens so that | can pay
all the money | borrowed from you. | should be able to bring all that
money tomorrow. Thank you very much for your assistance. But, perhaps
this. hds taught you and.me a good lesson. And, | believe other parents
and their daughters will also learn a good lesson from our story, if it gets
known to them.

The end

pts.



--- Page 217 ---
:
ONSET ESE Oy ey

Say this sentence correctly after your teacher:

Mbizi's daughter wanted to become an author and write school books.
The au in daughter, and guthor sound like ou

Say the words in the box below correctly.

The au in them have the same sound as in daughter and author.

laundry saucer auction applaud taught - caught automatic
haul naughty fault audible cautious maul ’ haunt

authentic launch audience pause August exhaust auditor
caution applause daunting

Read the words in the box and look up for the meanings in the dictionary.
Explain what the words you have looked up in the dictionary mean.

Using a dictionary, choose the answers to the following questions.
1. A book or story that one writes about one's own life history is called
A. an autobiography B. anovel
C. acomposition D. a summary
2. A person who writes books is called .
A. ateacher B. areporter. C. an author D. anannouncer
3. The opposite of son is

A. aunt B. mother C. niece D. daughter
4. When something is real and not false or copied, we say it is _.

A. sharp B. authentic C. suitable D. successful
5. A voice that is loud enough for the people to hear is

A. soft B. audible C. noisy D. proper

6. The people who are listening to a speech are called the

A. Class B. gathering C. audience D. spectators .

7. The word means careful thought with no hurry to avoid danger or risk.
A. fault B. authority C. applause D. caution

8. A is a short time when you stop doing something before starting again.
A. rest B. moment C. pause D. shortage

9. Alarge room or building that is used for meetings, lectures or public
performances is called .
A. award B. an auditorium
C. astadium D. alibrary -



--- Page 218 ---
10. The sound made by people who are applauding or clapping to show er
enjoyment is called
A. anoise B. awhistliing C. anapplause D. aresponse

11. Something that makes a thing less good is known as a
A. fault B. problem C. difficulty D. record

A new teacher wanted to get information cbout the learners in her class. Tne
teacher asked every learner in the class to cornplete the following form.

Surname: |
[sex Bate ot pith} 2 tenth Year
PCC TL 2 oT

Home adaress

Reigion |
Hobbies (only two) Pe

life —
Address:
Contact number:

Number of: Brothers:

Imagine that you were one of the learners in that class. Copy and complete the
form correctly, writing clearly and neatly in capital letters.

People who use banks have to fill in deposit forms when they deposit some money
and withdrawal forms when they withdraw money. People also fill in forms when
they apply for jobs, birth certificates, passports, or for vacancies in schools and
colleges etc.

It is very important to fill in forms truthfully, accurately and clearly. Your teacher will
bring to the class some of these forms for you to fill in correctly.
be ‘



--- Page 219 ---
Debate on the following topics:

1. Child marriages should be banned. ‘

2. Children should be left to marry if they choose to. .

3. . It is fine for parents to choose marriage partners for their children.

iN 30 words, write a summary of the play: | will marry when | am ready, that you
have read and staged in this unit. Write the summary under the same heading.

* how it all started/began

* what the people in the play did or said (you may use quotation marks)

* how it ended

* the lessons people get from the play.

Write a composition explaining why you will not be forced into marriage. Your
composition should be 80 - 120 words in length. You can use some of the ideas
below:

* itis a violation of children's rights

dropping out of school

doing adult responsibilities when you are a child

missing out on being a child

financial problems



--- Page 220 ---
|
|

English Paper 1
Time: | hour 30 minutes (Total marks: 40)

Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.

Mapope and Bere

Mapope was a miser. He liked to keep his wealth or riches but was unwilling to
make use of it. Although he had a lot of wealth, Mapope lived a poor man's
life. He was skinny because he ate very little food. He was scruffy because he

wore tattered clothes and worn-out shoes.

Mapope put all his money in a-tin-and buried it in a deep hole near an
anthill. Everyday he made frequent visits to this spot near the anthill just fo be
satisfied that his money was still there. A very poor neighbour, Bere observed
Mapope'’s frequent visits to the anthill and got curious. He watched Mapope’s
movements from a hideout and soon discovered the secret.

Then, one dark night Bere went and dug out the tin with Mapope’s money.
Erom that day onwards, Bere’s lifestyle changed. He was now wearing new
clothes and buying lots of food for his family. Mapope. who by now had
realized that his tin with the money was missing became suspicious and
dragged Bere to court.

In court, Mapope was still looking very much like a poor man while Bere looked
the opposite. Bere argued that he was a rich man who could not steal from a
poor man like Mapope. After looking at both Mapope and Bere closely, the

judge made a ruling in favour of the latter.

1. Amiser is a person who
A. is very poor
B. has lot of wealth but is unwilling to make use of it
C. makes frequent visits to a secret place
D.. looks skinny and scruffy

2. Another word for wealth is

Te
A. riches ° -B. food ‘ C. clothes D. money

3. Why did Mapope live a poor man's life?
A. He was poor. B. He had hidden his money away.

C. He was a miser D. Someone had stolen his money

a eee eeeee eee een tere —eeameneereneneenerr eae narinttae that BR Oe



--- Page 221 ---
Mapope made frequent visits to a spot near the anthill everyday 4

A. to keep himself busy. B. froma secret hideout

C. to hide his money. to check on his money hidden there
To observe is __.
A. to hide in a dark places B. to make frequent visits

Oo

C. to watch with interest D. to steal something

The word ‘frequent’ means .

A. happening only once B. happening very few times
C. happening often ) D. not happening at all

When someone becomes curious like Bere was, he or she

A. wants to find out about sornething

B. has completely changed his or her lifestyle

C. looks very different . -

D. is not interested in what is happening to other people

What made Mapope suspicious that Bere had stolen his money?

A. The ruling of the judge.

B. The change for the better in Bere's lifestyle. :

C. The tin that was missing from the hole where he had buried it.
D. The frequent movements he made to the anthill, ;

. Which of these statements is true?

A. From the beginning, Bere was not a poor man at all.

B. From the beginning, Mapope was always a poor man.

C. Someone else, not Bere, stole the tin with Mapope’s money.
D. Bere stole the tin with Mapope'’s money.

. The story ends with the judge ruling that

A. Mapope should not look like a poor man when he was arich.
B. Bere had not stolen Mapope's money.

C. Bere had stolen Mapope'’s money.

D. People should never bury their money in tins.

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

“V1.
12.

13.

Elizabeth, as well as Nomsa in Grade Five. - .

A. is B are C. will D. would

At her wedding, the bride had a of flowers in her hands. .

A. bundle. B. group C. cluster D. bouquet

The policeman showed the children how to a busy road safely.
A. crossed , crosses C. cross: D. crossing

. The members of the church have a lot of help to many people.

A. gave B. given C. give ~D. giving

. When | heard the noise, | could tell that there-was in the house.

A. anyone B. anybody C. someone D. everyone

. fl you, | would go to the teacher and apologise.

A. were B. am C. was D. are



--- Page 222 ---
; Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow.
The cow and the calf

Our family was poor and lived on alms given to us at the local church. The
alms could be in the form of clothes, food cind sometimes cash. Quite often
the clothes given to us as alms were either too big or too smalll for us but we still
wore them when going to church. The church was the place where we got all
our needs; so we never wanted to miss any church service.

One year, our family got the alms in the form of a cow. We were very grateful
and sang a hymn praising God and his generous people. As the only son in the
family, it became my responsibility to look after this cow. With the help of my
two sisters, we fed the cow on dry stalks of maize. wheat and rice gathered
from the people's gardens. During the day, | sometimes drove the cow fo the
river to drink or to the pastures where | met other herdboys with their herds.
How | wished to have as many cattle as they had one day!

One day the cow had a healthy calf out in the pastures and | was filled with
joy. The calf was. still too weak to walk home. When it was time to go home. |
decided to carry it on my shoulders. The cow looked at me calmly as | tried to
lift the calf. Then, as | tried to do that, the calf slipped from my palms. The poor
calf fell with a thud on the hard ground.

The cow immediately lost its calmness and charged at me like an angry bull.
| rolled on the ground under the cow's legs. The cow missed me narrowly but
gored its own calf with its sharp horns. The sharp horns cut the calf into halves.
One half had the calf’s head and forelegs. The other half had the tail and the
-hind legs. How | wished | had not tried to lift the calf in the first place!

17. What are ‘alms’?
A. Church services.
B. People who go to church.
C. Gifts given to the poor people
D. One's own two arms.
18. The inside part of your hands between the fingers and the wrist are the
A. palms B. halves C. horns D. stalks
-19. Areligious song that people sing praising God is Known as a ;
A. prayer B. hymn C. responsibility D. praise
20. Why did the narrator decide to carry the calf home on his shoulders?
A. He was filled with joy.
B.. It w@s his responsibility. ,
C. The calf was too weak to walk.
D. It was time to go home.

eee See eee oe caeeamenearce anne tegmen ere eaenens EE II 8ES pewinw cnerenceetctaen ts cette eens rene



--- Page 223 ---
ane meme mp tt or 9 nt ale yee pe et Sain fon ror aeepaeiite fuemuesea ates peue ce oo Trt meen coe emaaes aaarevermaraicamamrnenattnn erate detente hematin tentte yc a vaee ep me

21. Why was the cow angry with him?
A. The narrator had taken away its calf.
B. The narrator had dropped its calf.
C. The narrator had rolled on the ground.
D. The narrator had killed the calf.

22. This story has

A. an exciting ending B. avery happy ending
C. a sorrowful ending D. acalm ending

Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.
23. My father looks like a young man he is quite old.

A. and B. so C. although D. now

24. We called the to come and repair the water pipes in our home.
A. mechanic B. electrician C. plumber D. vendor

25. The invitation card, | __- _ was read in church.
A. writes ° B. written C. wrote D. writing

26. A chameleon is one of the __ animals that | know.

A. slowest B. slowly C. slower D. slow
27. The police are looking for the man started the veld fire that
destroyed the plantation.

A. Which B. what C. whom D. who
28. | could tell that there was.a snake when | heard its
A. ‘roaring B. hissing C. whistling D. shrieking

Read the passage below and answer the questions below it.

The new school prefect

Mr Rugoya, our class teacher was also the Head Teacher of our small school.
He was a hard-working and honest man; which is why the parents liked him
very much. Mr Rugoya was also very strict with the learners and meted out
hard punishment to those who misbehaved. This earned him the nickname
‘hardmaster’ from the learners.

At the beginning of the new term, Mr Rugoya appointed a new school prefect.
In the past Mr Rugoya had allowed the learners to elect their prefect. It turned
out that the learners always elected someone who would not report them when
they misbehaved. Mr Rugoya made up his mind and decided that he himself
was going to appoint¥he next school prefect.

At first Mr Rugoya had in his mind a short list Of four possible prefects Bornwell,
Kudzai, Bhekane and Joyce. Then he dropped the first two for coming to school
late on many occasions. After that he set a secret test to find out who of the
remaining two was more honest and therefore, suitable to be the school prefect.



--- Page 224 ---
ESR?

Secretly, Mr Rugoya removed the pencils from each of the two learners’ school
bags. Both learners’ pencils looked old and short. Then he ordered all the
learners in the class to do a drawing exercise which required the use of pencils.
_ As the rest of the learners got busy with the exercise, both Bhekane and Joyce,
one after the other said to Mr Rugoya, “Excuse me Sir! | cannot find my pencil.”

First, Mr Rugoya called Bhekane to his side. He pulled out a new pencil and said
to him, “Could this be your pencil?” Bhekane looked at the new, long pencil and
said, “Yes Sir! That's my pencil." Mr Rugoya gave the new pencil to Bhekane
who quickly and quite happily returned to his seat to get on with the drawing
exercise.

After that, Mr Rugoya called Joyce to his side and, with another new, long pencil
also did exactly what he had done to Bhekane. Joyce looked at the new pencil
and said, “No Sir! That's not my pencil. My pencil is old and short. The one you
are showing me is still new and long.”

At the end of the school day the learners alll listened as Mr Rugoya announced
the name of the new school prefect.

29. Why was Mr Rugoya given the nickname ‘hardmaster’ by the learners?
A. He was the headmaster of their small school.
B. The parents liked him very much.
C. He gave hard punishments to the learners who misbehaved.
D. He was also their class teacher.
30. The learners had been electing school prefects wno were
A. very honest. B coming late to school.
C. dishonest D. hardworking
31. Mr Rugoya made up his mind that he was going to appoint the new school
prefect. The underlined phrase means . .

A. appointed B. tested
C. required D. decided
32. Why were Bornwell and Kudzai dropped from the short list of possible school
prefects? . .
. A. They were not honest. B. They were often coming late to school.

C. They were too busy. D. They were not elected by the learners.

33. Who said, “Excuse me Sir! | cannot find my pencil?”

A. Bhekane B. Joyce
C. Both Bhekane and Joyce D. Kudzai or Bornwell
34, Who do you think was appointed the new school prefect by Mr Rugoya?

A. Joyce. B. Bornwell. C. Bhekane D. Kudzdai.
Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.
35. The new pair of shoes__————_left_ in the big box.

A. have B. were Cc. are D. was



--- Page 225 ---
36. Everyday he goes to work by bicycle,

A. doesn't he? B. won't he?
C. didn't he? D. wasn't he?
37. She lives in Zimbabwe she is a Zambian by birth.
A. because B, although C. and D. since
38. The box was heavy that | could not lift it alone.
A. very B. too C. so ~ D. as
39. Most trees shed their leaves __ winter.
A. during B. through C. at D. when
40. You cannot be Oo good athlete if you are as slow as a

A. dog B. baby C. tractor D. tortoise

English Paper 2

Time: 1 hour 45 minutes

SECTION A COMPOSITION (20 MARKS)
You are advised to spend 1 hour on this section,

CHOOSE EITHER QUESTION (i) OR (ii) AND WRITE ABOUT IT.

Question (i)

Write acomposition about the celebrations you attendedone day. Yourcomposition
should be 80 ~ 120 words in length. Use the following points and any other that you
may think of:

* what the celebrations were about

* the date and venue of the celebrations |

* the people who attended the celebrations and their activities

* the guest speaker and what he/she said

* how the celebrations ended,

Question (il)
A learner in your Class needs help. Write a letter to your brother who is employed :
in the city asking him to help the needy learner. The body of your letter should be
80 - 120 words in length. Use the following points and any other you may think of in
writing your letter: ,

* the name of the learner

* where the learne ives

° the kind of help that learner needs

* why the learner needs help

* how your brother can help the needy learner ~ ;

* what you and the other learners in your class have done to help.

So teem mt econ teense oe TNE erent nanan teers ane seacenne CTT eR Me ee ce “


--- Page 226 ---
SECTION B COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY (15 marks)
You are advised to spend 30 minutes on this section.
(i) Comprehension (10 marks) |

Read this passage very carefully before you attempt any questions.

Answer all questions in full sentences. You are advised to write your sentences in
good grammar. and punctuate them correctly.

Mambas versus Eagles

Two football teams: the Mambas and the Eagles come from the same
neighbourhood. As such, they are supposed to be neighbourly - being friendly
and helpful to each other. However, when football matches are played between
these two teams, there is no neighbourliness at all.

This year alone, the two football teams have met four times with all the games
ending in draws. This makes it impossible to predict the outcome of their next
football match. With known good players like Pele, Dumo, Rio. Mhere, Tambo
and many others, football matches between Mambas and Eagles are always
exciting to watch. Every game they play against one another is full of tension.

Now, a local businessman has increased that tension. He has donated a football
trophy and some money to be played for by these two teams. Both teams have
now hired outside coaches to train their teams.

Mr Shumba made the donations after watching the two teams play. In that
match, Mambas, ‘enjoying the home ground advantage, scored first. Pele hit
a rising shot that crashed on the crossbar and bounced back into play. Dumo,
who was running at full speed met the rebound and hammered it into the nets.
There was wild jubilation from the multitudes of home spectators watching the
game.

However, this one-goal lead was very short-lived as the visiting team equalized
five minutes later. First, Tambo directed his corner kick into the penalty area. Rio,
who was well-positioned fo head the ball into the nets was then pushed down
by a defender. The referee, who was close to the action blew his whistle while
pointing to the penalty spot.

_ Then there was a stoppage for about a minute as the players pushed and pulled

one another, arguing for or against the referee’s decision. When calm returned,
the ball was placed on the penalty spot. Mhere stepped forward and made no
mistake, placing the ball in the top left corner of the nets and sending the keeper
diving in theawr6ng direction. .

That is how the match ended.



--- Page 227 ---
men ees "

renee

OR Semen tee ey mR A Nees oe menses atten neta ge FNP 6 eae oreo

Questions

1. What should neighbourly People do to one another?

Why was it difficult to predict the outcome of the next match between the
Mambas and the Eagles?

What is tension?

Who was Mr Shumba in this story?
How did the businessman increase the tension between the two teams?
Were the two teams serious about winning the trophy donated by the local
businessman? Why?

Where was the football match in the story played?

For which team did Mhere play?

. Why was there q stoppage of about a minute during the match?

0. What was the scoreline at the end of this football match?

SOR

~0 9 NI

—

(ii) Summary (5 marks)

IN 30 words, write a summary of the story: Mambas versus Eagles that you have
read above, You may make use of the following guidelines if you wish:

* who the Mambas and the Eagles were

* the games they had played this year alone

* why their football matches were exciting to watch

° the football match sponsored by Mr Shumba,



--- Page 228 ---
List of irregular verbs and their tenses

Base

Bb
beat:

become

begin
bend
bet

bite —
bleed
blow

break _

bring
build
burn
burst
buy

Ce
catch
choose
cling
come
cost
creep
cut

Dd
deal
dig

do
draw
dream
drink
drive

Ee
eat

Ff

fall
feed:
feel

Continuous

' beating
becoming
beginning-
bending
betting
biting
bleeding

. blowing
breaking
bringing
building
burning
bursting
buying

catching
choosing
clinging
coming
costing
creeping
cutting

dealing
digging
doing
drawing
dreaming
drinking
driving

eating

e

>

falling
feeding
feeling

Simple past

beat
became
began
bent

bet

bit

bled
blew
broke

_ brought

built
burnt/burned
burst

bought

caught
chose
clung
came
cost
crept
cut

dealt
dug
did
drew
dreamt
drank
drove

ate

fell
fed
felt

Past participle

beaten
become
begun
bent
bet
bitten
bled
blown
broken
brought
built
burnt
burst
bought

caught
chosen
clung
come
cost
crept
cut

dealt
dug
done
drawn
dreamt
drunk
driven

eaten

fallen
fed
felt



--- Page 229 ---
Base

fight
find

fit

flee

fly
forbid
forecast
forget
forgive
freeze

Gg
get
give
go
grind
grow

Hh
hang
have
hear
hide
hit
hold
hurt

Kk

keep
kneel
know

LI
lay
lead
lean
leap
learn
leave

lend
let

lie (lie down)

light
lose

(lay eggs)

Continuous

fighting
finding
fitting
fleeing
flying
forbidding
forecasting
forgetting
forgiving
freezing

getting
giving
going
grinding
growing

hanging
having
hearing
hiding
hitting
holding
hurting

keeping
kneeling
knowing

laying
leading
leaning ,
leaping
learning
leaving
lending
letting
lying :
lighting
losing

Simple past

fought
found
fitted
fled
flew
forbade
forecast
forgot
forgave
froze

got
gave
went
ground
grew

hung, hanged
had

heard

hid

hit

held

hurt

kept
knelt
knew

laid
led
leant
leapt
learnt
left
lent
let
lay

lit
lost

Past participle

fought -
found
fitted

fled
flown
forbidden
forecast
forgotten
forgiven

frozen

got
given
gone
ground
grown

hung, hanged
had

heard

hidden

hit

held

hurt

kept
knelt
known

laid
led
leant
leapt
learnt
left
lent
let
lain
lit, lighted
lost



--- Page 230 ---
Base

Mm
make
mean
meet
mistake

Pp
pay
prove

“put

Qq
quit

Rr
read
ride
ring
rise
run

Ss
say
see
seek
sell
send
set
shed
shake
shine
shoot
shrink
shut
sing
sink
sit
sleep
slide
slit
smell
speak
speed

Continuous

making
meaning
meeting
mistaking

paying
proving
putting

quitting

reading
riding
ringing
rising
running

saying
seeing
seeking
selling
sending
setting
shedding
shaking
shining
shooting
shrinking
shutting
singing
sinking
sitting
sleeping
sliding
slitting
smelling
speaking
speeding

Simple past

made
meant
met
mistook

paid
proved
put

quit

read
rode
rang
rose
ran

said
Saw
sought
sold
sent
set
shed
shook
shone
shot
shrank
shut

sang
sank
sat
slept
slid
slit
smelt

Past participle

made
meant
met
mistaken

paid
proven
put

quit

read
ridden
rung
risen
run

said
seen
sought
sold
sent
set
shed
shaken
shone
shot
shrunk
shut
SUNG
sunk
sat
slept
slid

Slit
smelt
spoken
sped



--- Page 231 ---
Se ee

hic

Base

spend
Spill
spin
spit
split
spoil.
spread
spring
stand
steal
stick
sting
stink
stride

- strike

strive
swear
sweep
swim
swing

Tt
take
teach
tear
tell
think
throw
thrust
tread

Ww
wake
wear
weave
win
withdraw
wring
write

Continuous

spending
spilling
spinning
spitting
splitting
spoiling
spreading
springing
standing
stealing
sticking
stinging
stinking
striding
striking
Striving
swearing
sweeping
swimming
swinging

taking |
teaching
tearing
telling
thinking
throwing
thrusting
treading

waking
.wearing
weaving
winning

withdrawing
wringing
writing

Simple past

spent
spilt, spilled
spun
spat
split
spoilt
spread
sprang
stood
stole
stuck
stung
stank
strode
struck
strove
swore
swept
swam .

~ swung

took
taught -
tore
told
thought
threw
thrust
trod.

woke
wore
wove
won
withdrew
wrung
wrote

‘Past participle

spent
spilt, spilled
spun
spat
split
spoilt
spread
sprung
stood
stolen
stuck
stung
stunk
strode
struck
striven
sworn
swept
swum
SWUNG

taken
taught
torn
told
thought
thrown
thrust
trodden

woken
worn
woven |
won
withdrawn
wrung
written:



